WC Social Development allocates close to R30m to assist the homeless 28 June 2022 The Western Cape’s Department of Social Development allocated R28 988 595 of its budget to implement a host of measures to protect citizens of the province who are currently homeless. As the harsh winter weather becomes a daily reality, the department’s measures to protect the most vulnerable in society are more necessary than ever. In a reply to a DA parliamentary question, the Western Cape Minister of Social Development, Sharna Fernandez, revealed that the allocated funds includes the subsidisation of 2 308 bed spaces at 37 night shelters across the province, which provide a desperately needed place to stay for many homeless adults. The department continues to expand its capacity in this regard, with R4.5 million being spent to renovate the old Robbie Nurock clinic to turn it into a shelter. When this facility becomes operational, it will provide quality shelter space for a further 100 occupants. Fifteen of the Western Cape’s shelters have also begun to implement measures which focus specifically on mitigating the effects of cold weather. These include the distribution of food parcels, blankets and mattresses, sleeping bags, and winter clothing which protects the wearer from the elements. Funding has been allocated for these measures to remain in place throughout the coldest months of the winter. DA Western Cape Spokesperson on Social Development Dan Plato said: “Due to the economic challenges caused by the pandemic and national government’s response to it, homelessness remains a problem for all of South Africa. While the focus of the Western Cape government remains on reducing the number of people affected by homelessness in the province, the Province also considers it vital to provide as much relief as possible in the interim. This is especially true in the winter months, when cold temperatures and rainfall make surviving even more difficult for those already under profound stress. As chairperson of the Western Cape Standing Committee on Social Development, I am pleased to see that the Department of Social Development has taken proactive steps to provide relief to the homeless in our province. I will continue to visit the sites of the department’s initiatives to ensure everything possible is being done in the Western Cape to mitigate the effects of the country’s social ills, and will work with the department to find innovative solutions to these challenges.” Issued by Dan Plato, DA Western Cape Spokesperson on Social Development, 28 June 2022