ActionSA demands answers from SARS and SARB on Ramaphosa millions 6 June 2022 Today I have written to the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Lesetja Kganyago, and the Commissioner of SARS, Edward Kieswetter, in respect of the revelations relating to the theft or $4 million from President Ramaphosa’s Phala Phala game farm in Limpopo. South Africans have had to come to terms with this news which would seem to indicate the breaking of a number of laws which exist to prevent money laundering in our country. My letters to the SARB Governor specifically pose a number of questions, key amongst which was whether any declarations or documentation had been submitted in relation to foreign currency transactions at Phala Phala and whether the SARB has any knowledge of this. While my letter to the SARS Commissioner raises questions about SARS’ knowledge about these funds, declarations made in respect of this cash and whether tax had been paid in respect of such transactions. It is illegal for South African businesses to transact in foreign currency unless it is for export purposes, and even then, documentation would exist to legalise such a transaction which had to be by electronic transfer and never in cash. It is further known that tourists are limited to only foreign currency not exceeding R25 000, and no local citizen would be able to hold more than $10 000 in foreign currency. In a country where the rule of law remains a threatened principle, and where South Africans are exposes to so much lawlessness, it is of grave concern that the President’s statements this week would suggest he has broken the laws of our country. What is most troubling is that President Ramaphosa remains evasive and wanting to treat this like an in-house matter that should not concern the rest of the country. This has been consistent with his prioritisation of the ANC of our country, and it cannot be tolerated any further. ActionSA will anticipate responses from both SARS and the SARB but will immediately instruct our legal teams to observe proceedings carefully in the coming days and weeks. If we see organs of state and law enforcement agencies acting to defend the President, and not the laws of our country, we will not hesitate to approach the courts. For our country to succeed we need a rule of law. This is a core principle within ActionSA that guides the solutions we present to the South African people. At the heart of this principle, is the notion that every South African is equal before the law and that wrongdoing will be acted upon whether it is committed by an ordinary person or the President of the Republic. This is the principle that must be defended in this case, and we call on all South Africans to rally behind ActionSA’s defence of this principle. Issued by Herman Mashaba, President, ActionSA, 6 May 2022