Media statement by Carl Niehaus about the dismissal of the farcical politically driven Covid-19 case against him 28 June 2022 On the 8 July 2021 I was arrested in front of the Estcourt prison where President Jacob Zuma was illegally imprisoned because of a travesty of justice committed by the Constitutional Court (CC). I went to Estcourt prison the day after President Zuma was incarcerated in order to try and visit him, and to establish his well being. While I was doing a live interview with SABC TV News at Estcourt prison, I was arrested. The whole nation saw that pathetic travesty of justice and abuse of police power live on their television screens. I was also detained for hours in the holding cells of the Estcourt police station, before I was charged. Since then the court case dragged on for a year, with me having had to travel to Estcourt to appear in court, at great expense, for no less than five times. Yesterday, on the 27th of June 2022, only 11 days short of a whole year after I was arrested, the magistrate in this farcical court case accepted my application for a Section 174 discharge/dismissal of the case against me, and threw the whole farcical and politically motivated charade into the proverbial rubbish bin. The magistrate had harsh words for the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA), asking why only I was arrested and charged, while the earlier on the same day, when I was arrested, the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Ronald Lamola, addressed a crowd in front of the very same Estcourt prison, and no one, including the Minister, was arrested or charged. I was evidently specifically targeted with selective persecution, and selective justice is no justice at all! I thank the magistrate for her courage to carry out her duties without fear or favor. It is good that we still have officers of the court that do not allow themselves to be intimidated, used, and captured. She stands as a shining example, and beacon of hope, against those in the judiciary - including her own Chief Justice - who have sold out their souls in pathetic service to #WhiteMonopolyCapital, and theabuse of power by the agents of #WMC - most notably President Cyril Ramaphosa himself. It does not go unnoticed that, while I was with indecent rush arrested and arraigned before the courts on the basis of flimsy and fabricated charges, the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the NationalProsecuting Authority (NPA) are now dragging their feet to arrest and charge Cyril Ramaphosa for the extremely serious crimes that have been exposed and reported, with regards to the #PhalaPhalaFarm saga. This is nothing less than a travesty of justice! I thank my attorney Eric Mabuza, and my brilliant advocate, Nthabiseng Mokoena, for the excellent legal work that they have done to expose the abuse by the state, and the terrible injustice that I have beensubjected to. They are true examples of black excellence. I am also truly, and deeply grateful, especially to my partner, Noluthando Mdluli, and also to all my friends and comrades, who stood by me throughout this ordeal. I thank those comrades who travelled all the way to Estcourt to attend my court appearances. Their acts of solidarity and comradeship must be celebrated and emulated, as we build a strong people's movement throughout our country, based on broad citizen's power, to finally rid ourselves of the scourge to our nation, that Cyril Ramaphosa and his accolytes have become. With this dismissal of the farcical COVID-19 case against me, it is most certainly not where the matter ends. Such abuse of power, and misusing the resources of the State for nothing more than party political and narrow factional interests, cannot be left unaddressed, and should never go unpunished. I have therefore consulted with Advocate Dali Mpofu (SC), and I am grateful that he has accepted to act on my behalf in order to sue the State for wrongful arrest and malicious prosecution. I will now proceed immediately to file these charges against the State. Yesterday, after my case was dismissed, I addressed my comrades and friends who gathered to support me, outside the Estcourt Magistrate Court. I urge members of the public and the media to listen to my speech, which dealt in greater detail with the the abuse of State power, and the serious transgressions committed by the authorities, referred to in this media statement. My speech can be watched by using the following link to my #InMyCrossHairs YouTube channel: https://youtu.be/TA6i7tj8ZC8. I will never accept the abuse of State power, and repression of freedom of speech, in order to try to prevent myself, and other comrades, from calling out those who are selling out our nation, and who are destroying the future of our people. I am clear that Cyril Ramaphosa is an agent of imperialism and #WhiteMonopolyCapital, and I urge every South African - throughout the length and breadth of our country - to support the #RapaphosaMustGo!broad civil society campaign. We must NEVER allow ourselves to be intimidated, nor silenced. For me personally these experiences of State abuse, and blatant illegality, only serve to strengthen my resolve to continue our struggle for full liberation. Victory is certain! AY'KHALE! A LUTA CONTINUA! Issued by Carl Niehaus, 28 Jun2 2022