EFF condemns the deployment of State Security agents and the June 16 rally held in Thohoyandou, Vhembe 17 June 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) condemns in the harshest terms, the undemocratic abuse of the State Security Agency (SSA) by Cyril Ramaphosa and his cronies, who deployed members of the SSA at the EFF's June 16 Rally in Vhembe, Limpopo. In an attempt to promote political violence and intolerance, Ramaphosa's goons were deployed to the EFF Rally to distribute 6000 t-shirts which read "Malema Step Aside", along with caps. The individual who was distributing these t-shirts, would give RI00 in cash to anyone who took and wore the t-shirt. This means they had large amounts of cash on them to bribe members of the community to participate in an effort to disrupt an EFF rally. It is even more alarming that the internal security of the EFF apprehended three men who were armed with rifles, who were part of this nefarious attempt at harming the EFF and its leadership. The armed men were apprehended within close proximity of the stage, which leaves us with no doubt that they had an intention to cause deadly harm to not only the attendees of the rally, but the leadership collective on stage. The use of State Security Agents to cause confusion and chaos at the rally of an opposition party, is characteristic of the regimes of dictators. It is clear now that South Africa has entered a dark period where dirty tricks will be utilised to suppress political dissent and disagreements. It is no coincidence that this barbaric plot comes after the EFF has launched a campaign calling for Ramaphosa to Step Aside. He has now resolved to use the same gangster tactics he used to cover up his criminality in Phala Phala farm, were he tortured and bribed people who stole his laundered money, against the EFF. They chose to do this feeble-minded and dangerous tactic in Vhembe, because in their tribalistic and regionalist minds, Vhembe is a base of Cyril Ramaphosa, and would support such a lousy diversion tactic. The EFF commends the people of Vhembe for rejecting their useless attempt and being the first respondents in intercepting the distribution of their poorly conceptualised t-shirts. It was the masses that first rejected their lousy attempt to counter the Ramaphosa Must Step Aside campaign, and attended to them decisively. The EFF condemns the use of money which is supposed to ensure the security of the country is stable, on t-shirts to fight the opposition. It is a shameful act, to use State-machinery to try and intimidate and weaken an organisation that is holding the establishment accountable. The EFF has handed over these agents and instigators to the South African Police Services (SAPS), and will follow the case closely to ensure that they are arrested and reveal who sent them and for what purpose. We must never allow South Africa to descend into a gangster and militia state, where political opponents of the regime are targeted and face the risk of assassination as it was the case in the EFF's June 16 Rally. There is no State-sponsored campaign and deployment of armed thugs, that will deter the EFF from holding Ramaphosa accountable for his crimes. The EFF will ensure that Ramaphosa vacates the Office of the Presidency, as it is no place for a two-faced, manipulative criminal, who has no regard for our laws and democracy. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 17 June 2022