Solidarity lay criminal charges against alleged state capturers 9 June 2022 Solidarity today laid charges of fraud, corruption and violation of the Public Finance Management Act against Brian Molefe, Anoj Singh, Matshela Koko and Mosebenzi Zwane. According to Solidarity, justice has already been delayed hopelessly too long and South African citizens deserve immediate action from the South African Police Service (SAPS) and other structures. “The absolute injustice of years of corruption and theft cannot continue any further with an endless delay from our criminal justice system. These matters must continue. The pressure is now on our security services to do their job and the dragging of feet any further will not be tolerated,” explains Dr Dirk Hermann, Chief Executive Officer of Solidarity.In its charge, Solidarity claims that these individuals are responsible for more than R14,7 million in illegal contracts at Eskom while former minister, Mosebenzi Zwane, is accused of mismanaging a housing project worth about R1 billion. “All indications are that former minister, Mosebenzi Zwane, spent half of his R1 billion budget on the Free State Department of Human Settlements’ housing project during his term as MEC of the Free State, and that virtually no houses were built, and if something has been built it is extremely defective. Yet, instead of taking serious action against him, he was rewarded with a position as Minister of Mineral Resources by South Africa’s former president, Jacob Zuma,” says Hermann. “We need to make it clear that the consequences of looting tax money do not deserve promotion, but rather and orange overall.”Solidarity argues that the damage caused by corruption is not limited to financial loss, but that it destroys the state’s ability to provide critical services and that it cultivates distrust among citizens towards our legal system. “For South Africans to have hope and any confidence in the legal process, there must be consequences for people who illegally enrich themselves at the expense of the country’s prosperity and existence. If it is true that they are responsible for the fatal situation of our only power provider, they must be punished for every crime and abuse of power that is stipulated in the charges,” continued Hermann. Solidarity also announced that if no real progress is made with its charges, private prosecution will definitely be an option in the future. “We are tired of waiting for the government to take action. Deliberate action, accountability and bearing the consequences of plundering start with these charges. Let it serve as an example for anyone who is contemplating to plunder workers’ and taxpayers’ money,” Hermann concluded. Issued by Dirk Hermann, Chief Executive Officer, Solidarity, 9 June 2022