Parliament kick-starts investigation into GBV and sexual harassment claims involving EFF MPs and PPS 29 June 2022 Parliament has appointed an independent investigator, Adv Elizabeth Baloyi-Mere, to investigate complaints of gender-based violence, sexual harassment, intimidation and violence between Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) Members and the Parliamentary Protection Services (PPS) officials.  The investigation follows the events that occurred on 9 and 10 June 2022 during the Presidency Budget Vote and the Reply to the Debate on the Budget Vote.  EFF members were removed from the Chamber and on the online platform after, on both days, they engaged in gross disturbance in the House through persistent points of orders, disorderliness and defiance of the Speaker’s rulings and authority purporting to question the presence of President Cyril Ramaphosa to the Assembly. Following the forced removal of its members, the EFF submitted a complaint to the Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, requesting a full investigation of gender-based violence and sexual harassment against EFF MPs who were forcefully removed from the NA chamber. The PPS officials also lodged a complaint about the violent treatment they received from EFF Members who resisted and actively hindered them from carrying out the Speaker's instruction to remove the disruptive members from the Chamber. The PPS officials further reported that threats and intimidation were meted out to them by certain EFF members.  Adv. Baloyi-Mere's responsibility will be to assess the complaints and allegations made by the EFF members against the PPS officials, as well as complaints and claims made by the PPS officials against the EFF members, and then report to the Speaker on its findings and recommendations. Adv Baloyi-Mere will be required to complete the investigation within 14 working days and, after that, submit a written report within five working days to the Speaker. Advocate Baloyi-Mere has over ten years of experience and has a general litigation practice with her preferred areas of practice, including constitutional, administrative, public procurement, customary, African and general commercial law. She has appeared in the High Court, the Supreme Court of Appeal, the Constitutional Court and the Labour Court. She has also acted as a judge in the Pretoria High Court. Issued by Moloto Mothapo, Media Officer, Parliament, 29 June 2022