Release of Final Zondo Report: Now is the Time for Words to Give Way to Action 22 June 2022 This evening South Africans continued to witness President Ramaphosa’s platitudes about condemning corruption at a time when the country is calling for Action. This is the kind of leadership that South Africans have become used to, but this must change. The latest part of the Report deals with the capture of the State Security Agency, the SABC, the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA), and the landing of a private plane at the Waterkloof Military Airforce Base for a Gupta family wedding The voluminous nature of these reports and the lived experiences of our fellow South Africans show that very few, if anyone, is accountable for corruption in South Africa and for the capture of the state. A multitude of entities and individuals are implicated in the Report, which recommends an investigation into their envisaged criminal prosecution. Some of the names include: - Arthur Fraser (regarding the abuse of funds whilst heading up the Principal Agency Network (PAN); - David Mahlobo and Thulani Dlomo (in relation to State Security cash received and/or illegitimately handled by each of them); - Dudu Myeni (prima facie case of corruption for facilitation) - Duduzane Zuma (whether he committed any offence by facilitating acts of corruption, by facilitating bribes or by not reporting corruption that may have been committed in his presence by Tony Gupta when he offered a bribe to Mcebesi Jonas, Mxolisi Dukwana and Vusi Kona); - Edwin Sodi and his organisation Blackhead Consulting (for the payment of bribes); - Hlaudi Motsoeneng (for contravention of the PFMA); - In addition, the criminal prosecution of Brian Molefe is also recommended for his time at Transnet. This includes Malusi Gigaba amongst others; - Nomvula Mokonyane (for accepting a bribe from Bosasa); - The 2014 Eskom board (including Brian Molefe, Anoj Singh and Matshela Koko) for failure to exercise their fiduciary duties), as well as recovery of funds lost due to the Board’s misconduct; - Tom Moyane (to be charged with perjury for providing false evidence to Parliament); - Tony Gupta (for bribery/corruption arising out of his conduct in offering Mcebesi Jonas millions of Rand if he agreed to be Minister of Finance and to work with the Gupta family); Page 191 of the recommendations explicitly states that Jacob Zuma “facilitated a capture of the State by private individuals or entities.” For about 4 years, R1 billion and 5437 pages later, the question on every person’s mind is whether we will see action taken against those who sold out our country, or whether we will witness even more impunity in the chaotic situation that has become the leadership of the ANC. We call for the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Shamila Botohi to prioritise the prosecutions of all implicated parties in the Report without further delay. Many of those implicated in the report were implicated in testimony given months ago, which the NPA could have acted upon already. South Africa is in dire need of consequences that must follow wrongdoing if we are to have any faith in the criminal justice system. For this exercise to be more than a show, there must be prosecutions, convictions, and sentences sanctioned. ActionSA’s legal team will immediately initiate a watching brief to oversee that all those implicated in state capture are brought to justice. We have no confidence in the NPA to perform their mandate and therefore, will act vigilantly to ensure justice is served. If necessary, we will even fight for this in the courts ourselves. We will therefore explore all legal options to ensure compliance with this Report. It is time to fix South Africa and to turn our backs on corruption and thievery forever. Come 2024, the Nation will have an opportunity to do nationally what is taking place in by-elections and communities across South Africa – the systematic removal of the ANC government. Statement issued by Herman Mashaba, ActionSA President, 23 June 2022