Mob killing trend is deeply worrying 20 June 2022 The latest report about yet another alleged mob justice killing, which occurred yesterday on the corner of 1st Avenue and Lincoln Road in Belmont Park, Kraaifontein, points to a worrying trend. It is suspected by the SAPS that a 37-year-old man, whom community members accused of a crime, was allegedly beaten to death by community members. Minister Allen said: “This incident highlights a trend that is deeply concerning, especially since the last unjustifiable mob killing of Mr. Abongile Mafalala. This and any type of crime can never be condoned. Under no circumstances does any person have the right to take the law into their own hands. Wherever it is suspected that the law was broken, it is our civil duty to contact any law enforcement agency, so that an arrest can occur, allowing SAPS to further investigate the matter and let the court process run its course.” The South African Police Services’ (SAPS) crime statistics over the 4 quarters of the 2021/22 financial year indicates that in the Western Cape, there were 227 murder cases which has been linked to vigilantism/mob justice. The breakdown is: Apr – Jun: 48 cases Jul – Sep: 64 cases Oct – Dec: 55 cases Jan – Mar: 60 cases In the 4th quarter between Jan – Mar 2022, 16 cases, the most in the province, occurred in the Nyanga cluster and 11 each, which is joint 2nd in the Khayelitsha and Blue Downs clusters. Country-wide during the 21/22 financial year, there were 1 353 cases. For the 2020/21 financial year, the Western Cape recorded 151 cases of murder, directly linked to mob justice. This means there’s been a year-on-year increase of 76 cases in the province. The country had 903 cases during this period. Minister Allen said: “We understand that there are many communities who are frustrated and might have a deficit of trust in SAPS, but deciding to effect justice by themselves, is just committing another crime. This is unacceptable. The continued increase in the statistics sketches a worrying picture. I will continue to engage SAPS about their efforts to combat these types of crime.” “I’d also like to appeal to community members to not spread any fake/false news about certain individuals without ascertaining the facts. This is one of the most dangerous aspects that ties into vigilantism/mob killings. Let us be responsible and law-abiding citizens that do not make themselves guilty of this type of crime,” concluded Minister Allen. Issued by Marcellino Martin, Spokesperson for Minister Reagen Allen, 20 June 2022