Extended MKMVA NEC supports Carl Niehaus  26 June 2022 The National Executive Committee (NEC) of MKMVA, at an extended National Executive Committee (NEC) representative of the national, provincial and regional leadership of MKMVA, that was held yesterday (Saturday, 25 June 2022), expressed its outrage at the ongoing and farcical COVID-19 political persecution that our National Spokesperson, comrade Carl Niehaus, continues to be subjected to. The extended MKMVA NEC noted that comrade Niehaus’ presence at the Nkandla residence of President Zuma from the 2nd to the 4th of July, and on the 8th of July at the Estcourt Prison, was in execution of official instructions that he was given by the NEC of MKMVA to travel to these locations, and to register the support of MKMVA for President Jacob Zuma. The MKMVA NEC noted that comrade Niehaus was officially sanctioned by the NEC of MKMVA to make the statements that he made in support of President Zuma throughout this period, and that he did so dutifully, and never deviated from those instructions. As such he was throughout on official duty, and on behalf of MKMVA carried out his duties as an MKMVA NEC member, and National Spokesperson of MKMVA. The extended MKMVA NEC furthermore recalled that comrade Carl Niehaus, while carrying out his official duties as National Spokesperson of MKMVA, was arrested live on national television while being interviewed on the SABC TV News Channel, on the afternoon of Thursday the 8th of July 2021 in front of the Estcourt prison. President Jacob Zuma was imprisoned at Estcourt prison, after he had illegally been sentenced to a 15th month prison sentence, without a proper trial by the Constitutional Court. The extended NEC of MKMVA expressed its full, and unequivocal, support for comrade Niehaus. Right from the moment that comrade Niehaus was arrested it was evident that his arrest was never about the so-called contravention of COVID-19 regulations, but that it was a shameless act of political intimidation, and his ongoing prosecution is in fact political persecution not prosecution. This case is certainly not in pursuit of justice, it is nothing less than a shameless political trial. Selective justice, which is not justice at all, is evidently the order of the day. Just compare it to how the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, Mr. Ronald Lamola, addressed a crowd earlier the same day in front of the same Estcourt prison, but he was not charged for contravening COVID-19 regulations. Similarly the Deputy Minister of State Security, Mr. Zizi Kodwa, over the same period addressed a large crowd in Soweto, not wearing a mask, but again he was not charged. Not even to talk about how the South African Police Service (SAPS) and the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) are dragging their feet about charging President Cyril Ramaphosa for the blatant contraventions the foreign valuta exchange regulations, and other serious criminality such as abduction and torture, exposed in the Phala Phala farm saga. The extended MKMVA NEC noted with dismay that on Monday the 27th of June 2022 comrade Niehaus will for no less than the fifth time appear at the Estcourt Magistrate Court in a farcical legal process that is characterized by one postponement after the other. The extended MKMVA NEC called on all MKMVA members who are able to travel to Estcourt to show support for comrade Niehaus, and in doing so to insist that this trumped up and farcical case must immediately be dismissed, and the political persecution of comrade Niehaus must end forthwith. This was resolved, together with the call: #HandsOffCarlNiehaus! Issued by MKMVA, 26 June 2022