EFF marks the 46th anniversary of the 1976 June uprising 16 June 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) observes the 16th of June, as the day when the 1976 Youth Uprisings which shook the continent and the world happened and changed the course of our struggle against colonial domination. In what was the most inspired youth revolution to ever occur in the history of struggles against oppression and colonial systems of dominance, thousands of youth took to the streets to demand an education that is reflective of African reality. These young people, who are popularly known for demanding an end to being taught in Afrikaans, a language used for false supremacy by their racist-oppressors, fought against the domination of the mind. It wa a a generation that fought to call their souls their own, and confronted a brutal regime which was armed with machine guns, carrying stones in their hands and the hope for freedom in their hearts. It was the Black Consciousness Movement of Steven Bantu Biko, which agitated the youth and taught them black pride, and inspired thousands of black youth to take to the streets and fight for liberation. Ongkopotse Tiro, Tsietsi Mashinini and the brave 1976 generation refused to be told to express themselves, and educate themselves in a language they could not understand. It was a generation that understood that fear had been struck in the hearts of their parents, due to the banning of liberation movements and exile of combatants of the struggle. The 1976 generation bravely took the baton, and took the struggle further, igniting a flame that spilled over into the 1980's, where South Africa was rendered ungovernable by the youth. The EFF marked this day, by hosting a rally in honour of those brave heroes and heroines, in Thohoyandou, Limpopo. The Commander in Chief Julius Malema, placed into the correct historical context the meaning and significance of June 16 as not a day of celebrating being young, but one wear young people bled for the freedoms we enjoy today. The people of Thohoyandou came out in their numbers, to honour this generation which fought the Apartheid regime from the mountains of Thulamela in Vhembe. The struggle of 1976 generation spread from Soweto, Turfloop and to Vhembe, showing that once consciousness is sparked, an unstoppable force will resist oppression by any means necessary. The EFF will continue to honour that brave generation, by restoring the dignity of our people and the youth. We echo the call by the Commander in Chief to name streets in Thohoyandou, after the likes of Steve Biko, Tsietsi Mashinini, Ongkopotse Tiro, to ensure that our people remember and celebrate the generation of Black Consciousness. This is an important act of symbolism, which will undermine the attempts by the corrupt ruling party, to try and monopolise the struggle against Apartheid and erase other liberation heroes. The EFF will remain a beacon of hope for young people in our townships, in the Universities, TVET Colleges, High Schools and in all spheres of society. The war for free education must continue, and must be led by the EFF Students' Command (EFFSC). We wish the EFFSC a revolutionary happy 7th Birthday, and encourage them to continue to be a dependable force for all young people. The EFFSC must remain at the forefront of all youth struggles and never tire in fighting for workers, defending the poor and forcing the gates of education to be opened. The battle of the 1976 continues, because education is not free, racists continue to run rampant in the tertiary sector and society and young people continue to be slaves to alcohol and drugs. The EFF re-commits to fight for decolonized education which will contribute to the growth of African communities and society as a whole. Let the youth flood the ranks of the EFF, register to vote and usher in a new revolution, which will lead to Economic Freedom In Our Lifetime! Long live the undying Spirit of the 1976 Generation! Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 17 June 2022