BLACK LIVES (LIKE ALL OTHER LIVES) REALLY DO MATTER Let this sink in: Between 1 January and 31 March this year, 6,083 people were murdered in South Africa. Of these 898 were women and 306 were children under the age of 17. In total, these figures reflect a 22,2% increase in the murder rate compared with the same period last year. We have a government that breaks almost every statistic into racial categories to justify its attempts to centralise control over every aspect of society in pursuit of an ill-defined goal called “transformation”. But not the crime statistics. These are just given as totals, which would be the ideal in a non-racial society. But South Africa is not the non-racial society many of us worked for in the fight against apartheid. Racial differentiation is today embedded in every aspect of government policy. The perverse result is that most black people are no better off than they were at the height of apartheid. Policies of race-preferencing merely resulted in legalised corruption, that only benefitted a tiny politically connected black elite, leaving many even worse off than before. Especially in their vulnerability to crime. I have no doubt that, if we were to break down the crime statistics into racial categories, the vast majority of murder victims would be black people murdered by other black people. The life of every one of these murdered people mattered. But their murders went largely unnoticed, outside their small family circle. The media were too busy hunting down racial “micro aggressions” (small incidents that could be interpreted as acts of racism by white people against black people) to notice the massacre. A friend and colleague of mine contributed to this gruesome statistic during the past three months. He was a former DA Councillor, who worked tirelessly to expose corruption in the allocation of housing in disadvantaged communities. In March he was assassinated at point blank range. A few weeks later, three young women who witnessed his murder were also shot dead, presumably to stop them identifying the murderers. His widow has asked me not to give his name because she too is under threat of being murdered, and cannot return to work at a school near to where her husband was gunned down. If his widow were not in such danger, I would identify him and pay him a fulsome tribute for his courageous work over many years. This horrific story is not unusual in South Africa, where one can buy a “hit” against a person for as little as R5,000. Most of these murders are never solved. You would think that these murders would be a priority for the Black Lives Matter (BLM) movement, if they really believed that black lives matter. But to BLM, the only black lives that really matter, are those that are taken by whites. BLM activists pounce on these tragedies to drive their political agenda, which has nothing to do with the sanctity of life. When all the pious rhetoric is stripped away, it is a racist agenda which seeks to eradicate all the institutions and values of Western democracy, which BLM claims are mechanisms to preserve the privilege of white people in general, and white heterosexual males in particular. BLM activists, and their “Fallist” brethren in South Africa, spend their time hunting for proof of this thesis in every situation. Which is why the picture of a monkey on a T-shirt (and other perceived micro-aggressions) garner far more outrage than the contract killings of innocent people. I have just returned from Nelson Mandela Bay, where these contract killings have become routine. Recently, competition for tenders to clean drains in the City, led to the murder of more than 20 people, assassinated by rivals. This hardly made news outside the Metro. If BLM were serious, they would expose every one of these gruesome killings, and help to bring the perpetrators to justice. This might help bring down the horrific murder rate, of black people by black people. Not because of their race. But because of a simple fact: All Lives Matter. Source: Facebook.