DA pleased with progress in the appointment of new eThekwini City Manager 1 June 2022 The Democratic Alliance notes the progress on the eThekwini City Manager appointment process. This comes after the full Council previously rejected the report of the panel as chaired by Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda at the end of March. At Tuesday's full Council meeting, the Council agreed to start the process afresh. This includes the establishment of a multi-party panel consisting of four councillors and one member of civil society in terms of the law. Councillor Thabani Mthethwa, who is the DA's Chief Whip in the Council and a member of the Executive Committee, will be a member of the panel. The DA has made it clear from the outset that this is a process that needs to be fair, apolitical, and transparent. eThekwini desperately needs professional and competent managers who are beholden to the public and not the ANC. Previous: ANC-run eThekwini fails to pass Budget 31 May 2022 The ANC-led eThekwini Municipality has been unable to pass the final draft of the 2022-2023 Budget at today's Council Meeting. After it was tabled today by Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda, the ANC effectively acknowledged that their government did not have enough support to pass the budget and were forced to request that it be re-tabled within seven days. In terms of the Municipal Finance Management Act, the budget must be tabled in the Council at least 30 days prior to the start of the budget year. The new budget year starts on the 1st of July 2022. The Democratic Alliance has engaged fully with the budget process, ensuring that the municipality hosted a greater number of budget hearings than it had initially intended to. The party's 59 councillors will only support a budget that delivers more for people and less for politicians and focuses on key water and electricity failures. In that regard, and after reviewing the final budget that was circulated on the 29th of May, DA Caucus Leader Nicole Graham wrote to Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda and tabled the DA's concerns. These included: • The increased money that the municipality intends to borrow, specifically to cover the shortfall of disaster funding from the national government. EThekwini incurred R3.9 billion worth of damages in April alone and cannot borrow its way out of this crisis. National government cannot drag their feet any longer and expect ratepayers to foot the bill • The perks, cushions and benefits for staff and politicians - that deliver nothing for ordinary people- need to stop. This budget shows no real commitment to reducing rampant overtime, increases and bonuses whilst the city crumbles. Metro Police and security costs continue to escalate whilst ordinary residents are unsafe • R319 million remains unfunded in the Water and Sanitation and Electricity budgets despite these services being a huge problem across eThekwini. These should be a priority above all else; • Parties and events continue unabated despite limited funding. A small group of well-connected event organisers cannot party eThekwini out of poverty. A clean, safe and functioning city is a far greater tourism asset than any function. There is a significant need to reduce the municipality's operating expenditure and focus on what matters to communities. EThekwini residents are sick and tired of paying for services that are not delivered and it cannot be business as usual. In terms of section 25(1) of the Municipal Finance Management Act, the Council has failed to approve the budget and must now reconvene within 7 days to reconsider the budget. The ANC is now on the back foot and urgently needs to make concessions to move forward. The DA is clear about what we want to achieve: a budget that can deliver better services for eThekwini residents. This city is in the worst state that it has ever been and it is time to get back to basics. Statements issued by Councillor Nicole Graham - DA eThekwini Caucus Leader, 31 May and 1 June 2022