DA calls on KZN Premier to intervene as DA eThekwini councillor survives assassination attempt 24 June 2022 The Democratic Alliance in KwaZulu-Natal is shocked and condemns in the strongest terms the attack on one of its eThekwini Councillors last night, where an unnamed gunman fired four shots into the councillor’s house (view here and here).  What makes this situation even more disturbing is the fact that this is not the first incident involving this DA Councillor. The Councillor has over the last few months been receiving death threats and just recently a bullet was neatly placed at her front door. In all of these cases the matter has been reported to the South African Police Services (SAPS) and case numbers registered. In the incident involving the cartridge being placed at the councillors front of the house, SAPS did not even bother to visit the home or follow up on the matter. It was only once our DA spokesperson engaged senior SAPS officials that the matter received the necessary attention. Even more concerning and indeed sinister is the DA chief whip in the eThekwini caucus, Councillor Thabani Mthethwa, has been for some months now engaging the ANC Speaker of eThekwini, Thabani Nyawose, on the threats on the councillors life and urging the Speaker to supply protection for this Councillor. A process which the Speaker has the full delegated authority to implement until SAPS complete a threat analysis of the situation. How much more evidence does the Speaker need, yet he does absolutely nothing. Should something, God forbid, happen to this DA Councillor the Speaker will have blood on his hands. It has barely been a month since one of our councilors in the Zululand District also survived an assassination attempt. KZN has a horrific record of the murder of councillors, hence the commission of the Moerane investigation into political killings in the province. This report, and its many yet to be implemented recommendations remains in the hands of the Premier of KZN, Sihle Zikalala. The DA calls upon the Premier to intervene in this matter, clearly the ANC Speaker of eThekwini is failing in his responsibilities to protect the lives of councillors in this municipality. Issued by Francois Rodgers, DA KZN Leader, 24 June 2022