AfriForum launches Border Watch Initiative; sniffer dogs deployed to Musina  3 June 2022 The civil rights organisation AfriForum launched a new initiative to help safeguard South Arica’s borders. The Border Watch Initiative was established following the enormous support the organisation received after the premier of the documentary film Open Borders. The documentary depicted how poorly border control between South-Africa and Zimbabwe is applied and how AfriForum’s neighbourhood watches in this border area helps to safeguard the community. The Border Watch Initiative’s first course of action was to donate two sniffer dogs to AfriForum’s neighbourhood watch in Musina. Both these dogs (Duke and Hailey) are trained trackers and Duke is specifically trained to sniff out firearms and drugs. “Duke and Hailey will be valuable assets to strengthen the Musina neighbourhood watch’s methods to catch smugglers and seize their smuggled goods. The smugglers use the areas with dense bushes to cross the border and these sniffer dogs will assist the neighbourhood watch to quickly get on the trail of the smugglers. Duke will also help law enforcement during roadblocks because of his specific skills to sniff out firearms and drugs,” says Jacques Broodryk, Campaigns Manager at AfriForum. The Border Watch Initiative will also focus on strengthening and supporting AfriForum’s safety structures across the country. Various individuals and organisations have already indicated that they would like to sponsor equipment for the neighbourhood and farm watches in border areas. “Between June and September of last year alone AfriForum’s neighbourhood watch in Musina helped to seize smuggled goods with a total value of more than R12 million. This has a substantial impact on the illegal activities and, according to information we have received, some of these smugglers have thrown in the towel because of the resilience of our volunteers. This is an enormous success,” says Broodryk. AfriForum has 155 safety structures across the country and more than 10 000 volunteers that play a massive roll in safeguarding their communities. Issued by Jacques Broodryk, Campaigns Manager, AfriForum, 3 June 2022