NUMSA condemns the CEO and the BRPs of Comair for the suspension of operations 2 June 2022 The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) met with the management team of Comair including the CEO Glenn Orsmond to discuss the fate of the airline. NUMSA is shocked and surprised by the latest developments at Comair Limited and its decision to suspend all of its operations. The airline voluntarily grounded is operations from the 1st June 2022 on the basis that it has a cash flow crisis. It simply does not have enough funds to keep on flying. The management cited high fuel prices as part of the reason for its financial distress. It is regrettable for us to report to our members that the meeting with the CEO left us with more questions than answers. Unfortunately, the meeting was very frustrating because the CEO was at times evasive or unwilling to respond directly to certain questions for example: 1. We asked whether employees would be paid their salaries during the period of the suspension. Unfortunately management would not confirm, ‘yes’ or ‘no’ in response to that question. 2. We asked how long the suspension of operations would be in place. They could not say because it depends on whether the funding can be raised by the BRP’s. 3. We asked how much money does Comair need in order to be financially sustainable. They would not divulge the amount because they say that information is confidential. 4. We asked, “what are the timelines to raise the funding for the airline?” Again, that was a question they could not respond to. It is unfortunate that management chose to engage workers on such important issues without ensuring the BRP’s are also present so that we get all the answers. As NUMSA we have repeatedly called for the immediate resignation of Glenn Orsmond as CEO of the company due to his complete incompetence and lack of vision. Under the poor leadership of Mr. Orsmond and the BRP’s the airline has gone from one crisis to another. The grounding and suspension of the airline has left thousands of passengers deeply inconvenienced and management handled the situation very poorly. It is clear that the future of the airline remains very uncertain and we remain doubtful that Orsmond can assist us to find a long lasting resolution. We also have questions about the role of the BRP’s which have been in charge for almost two years. They were paid exorbitantly and were seemingly unable to foresee this financial hurdle. NUMSA represents about 700 Comair workers and we continue to call for the immediate resignation of Glen Orsmond and the immediate end of the business rescue process, which is only rescuing the practitioner’s personal bank balances by making them richer at our expense. Our members have had enough. They are understandably angry. We will demonstrate until Glen Orsmond marches out of the buildings permanently! This airline can be saved but as long as Orsmond and the BRP’s are at the helm, it will continue to nosedive. Our members will be picketing outside the premises of Comair on Friday the 3rd of June to highlight these issues. Aluta continua! The struggle continues! Issue by Irvin Jim, NUMAS General Secretary, 2 June 2022