EFF statement on convicted fraudster Nomusa Gabuza who has been sentence for voting 24 times in the 2021 local government elections 14 June 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters is not surprised by the conviction of a fraudster by the name of Nomusa Gabuza, who has been sentenced for voting 24-times in the Local Govemment Elections of 2021. Gabuza, who was sentenced in the Umlazi Regional Court in Kwa-Zulu Natal, plead guilty after she contravened the Local Government Municipal Electoral Act of 2000 with her callous and treasonous act. It is even more alarming that Gabuza was a presiding officer in a voting station, at the very school where she worked, and she knowingly and deliberately decided to compromise the integrity of the election. The actions of this one individual, are more than likely repeated across various provinces, municipalities and wards, because of the simple fact that the employees of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) are partisan, and belong to a union which is affiliated to an organisation that contests elections. It is a known secret, that presiding officers and electoral officials in South Africa's elections are members of the South African Democratic Teachers Union (SADTU). The EFF has raised this clear bias and compromise in each election cycle, and now that a teacher has been caught for voter fraud, we are vindicated. SADTU is an affiliate of the corrupt ANC, which is desperately clinging onto power by any means necessary. That Gabuza was able to stuff a ballot box with votes, means this was a well orchestrated act of subverting democracy, which was likely repeated across numerous areas. If it was not for the watchful eye of the party agent who discovered that she had stuffed a ballot box with ballots prior to voting, she would have gotten away with stealing an election. The sentencing of Nomusa Gabuza for voter fraud cements the fact that the ANC in Ethekwini did not win the election, and Gabuza's voter fraud is part of many other efforts to steal power in a municipality they lost. She is undoubtedly an affiliate of losers who could not stomach the rejection from voters, and as a result decided to undermine our democracy Gabuza's sentence of three years correctional supervision and four years' imprisonment, which is suspended for three years, is a slap on the wrist. Voter fraud is a grave crime, which is constituted by an undermining of democracy that has grave consequences on the lives of ordinary citizens. The EFF will explore all necessary and possible means of ensuring that the process of hiring SADTU members and officials to preside over the elections of South Africa comes to an end. No election will ever be free and fair, so long as ANC-unionists preside over the process. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 14 June 2022