Devolving policing to provinces will bring down crime in the Western Cape 6 June 2022 Note to editors: Please find soundbite here and photos here, here and here “The latest crime statistics have shocked us all and again raise our concerns that SAPS in the Western Cape is under-resourced. Minister Bheki Cele is failing the people of the Western Cape and he is failing in his duty to make South Africa safer for all. The DA in the Western Cape, as well as the Western Cape Government and the City of Cape Town, call for Minister Cele to step down immediately,” Mr Simmers said. During one of their regular liquor outlet inspections, a DA delegation met with Law Enforcement Advancement Programme (LEAP) officers today in Rocklands, Mitchells Plain, to gain insight into how they are fighting crime in the area and what their needs are to do even more. During the visit, the DA Provincial Leader, Tertuis Simmers, has learnt that the main drivers of murder in the area are alcohol abuse, drug abuse, and illegal firearms. Mr Simmers also stated that he is proud of the work that LEAP is doing to assist SAPS and the City of Cape Town’s Law Enforcement to make our communities safer. “LEAP forms part of the DA-led Western Cape Government’s Provincial Safety Plan and I am reassured today of the positive impact their work has in the community.” Today’s oversight visit has also revealed that much more can be done if there were more boots on the ground. “However, National Government is failing us time and again. We see budget allocations every year for policing, but we never see any improvement. Where is the money going to? “The ANC government is clearly unsuccessful in its fight against crime. Not only in the Western Cape, but across the country. Policing must urgently be devolved to competent provinces, such as the DA-led Western Cape so that we can build on the successes we have achieved already, but also do more. And we can only do this if we manage police services in our province,” Mr Simmers concluded. Issued by Tertuis Simmers, DA Provincial Leader, Western Cape, 6 June 2022