Consideration of report of Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Innovation on oversight visit to Stellenbosch University 26 May 2022 Ms N T MKHATSHWA: Thank you very much, House Chair, we must indicate that we would have appreciated more time to present this report to the House considering its relevance and generally not only because of what’s currently happening at Stellenbosch University but because of the need for us to play continuous oversight over the institution’s transformation journey. On 16 February 2022, the committee visited Stellenbosch University where we engaged with council management, student leaders, the institutional forum and workers to gain an understanding of the institution’s transformation journey. In the previous debate, there was an analysis which we made during this oversight. At Stellenbosch University, 30 000 black students applied out of 55 000 applicants. Only 1 000 black first-year students were enrolled out 5 700 first-year students. For me, there is a bit of suspicion to this because it almost seems as though that there is an attempt to be selective in the approval of applications. Now, if we do not allow for the natural makeup of these institutions as per the demographics of the country they are microcosms of, then we will have incidents like where Theuns thought it was okay to urinate over his fellow black student’s belongings because perhaps Theuns thought that the University of Stellenbosch exists in isolation to the rest of democratic South Africa; where his racism would perhaps be accommodated. Through the oversight that we do in higher education institutions, institutional autonomy at times becomes a hindrance when it is incorrectly used as a defence mechanism, yet it must be a collective interest to communities to be assured that these institutions are serving the public interests of harnessing young people who when they enter our communities as graduates, would be able to contribute to the strengthening the continuous journey of social change, where together we seek to create a South Africa that truly belongs to all who live in it as articulated in the Freedom Charter. We, as the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Innovation, acknowledge the fact that we need to see transformation and equality in the higher education sector between historically disadvantaged institutions and historically privileged institutions. That means that, we need to eradicate a culture of historical whiteness in historically privileged institutions in ensuring that these institutions are safe and inclusive spaces for all young people to thrive in harnessing their skills and knowledge to be active participants of our economy. There are number of matters that were addressed on this oversight visit. We looked into the issues of language in higher education and there was an agreement that we don’t seek to eradicate Afrikaans. In fact, in the ANC we speak about inclusivity, but we need to make sure that in the higher education space, we are diverse and inclusive enough in terms of languages used for teaching and learning to accommodate the different representation of students in the space. We received a briefing as well from the department on that. What stuck out from what the student representative council, SRC, said was that, we need to ensure that these policies and frameworks that are printed and conceptualized become a learned reality for all students and workers in the institution. That is something that we, as a committee, are committed to by ensuring we support the sector in achieving. Down with sexism and down with racialism. We present this report for the House to consider. Thank you so much, House Chair. Ms C V KING Ms N T MKHATSHWA Ms C V KING: Thank you, House Chair, transformation normally implies deep change in knowledge and curriculum. It mostly entails questions about inclusion, identity, diversity, power, intellectual tradition and intellectual justice. In the higher education context in South Africa, transformation has a different meaning. Its definition is rooted in our country’s apartheid history. Multifaceted and complex is how transformation at higher education can be described. It involves integrated processes of continuous institutional change in all aspects of university functioning. Transformation is therefore the driving force that moves universities from the current state to a desired state based on the inclusive process of spaces of democratisation and restitution. The oversight was to establish Stellenbosch University’s 2022 academic readiness, its financial sustainability, and transformational progress. Stellenbosch University’s vision to be Africa’s leading research-intensive university, globally recognised as excellent, inclusive and innovative to advance knowledge in service to society, has no doubt to ensure its academic programme and finances are geared towards achieving their vision. At a university such as Stellenbosch, which its separatist history of more than a decade, they endeavored to place transformation at the centre of their operations. Based on its Vision 2024, Strategic Framework 2019-24, 2022-27 Institutional Plan, the university has centred its transformational agenda on eight themes, which are: Transforming institution, talent in the institution, internationalisation, teaching and learning, student experience, social impact, research for impact, and leadership. To ensure achievements for its transformational agenda, Stellenbosch University increases transformational key performance indicator, KPI, for all employees from 20% to 25%, employment equity plans included for the appointments committee of the senate, the rector’ strategic fund used for the advancement of the new generation of academics, conducting research on transformation and various staff publishing on transformation, visual redress such as having the preamble of their constitution in three languages in front of the Old Main building, welcoming benches in 15 languages on the Rooiplein, renaming HB Thorn Theatre to Adam Small Theatre, renaming RW Wilcocks building to Krotoa building and making its emblem inclusive showcasing the three official languages of the Western Cape. Well, with all of the concerted effort to ensure transformation, what led to this oversight? Could it be the DA’s fight against the institution on its intentional transformational agenda to suppress Afrikaans and the Nama Khoi languages in its language policy? That certainly was the real reason for it. However, with enough exerted pressure, the university had this to say in its report to the portfolio committee: Stellenbosch University is committed to multilingualism by using the three official languages of the Western Cape. Stellenbosch University supports the view that Afrikaans and Nama, Khoi and San languages are indigenous languages and was confirmed by the Stellenbosch co-ordinating council. On the increase in application of its black student comprising of African, Coloured and Indian students from 22 000 in 2021 to 55 000 in 2022, progressive initiative are embarked on such as offering under and postgraduate degrees in IsiXhosa, IsiXhosa interpretation and translation services and introducing Mobilex, which provides online trilingual glossary of terminology. Now, let’s get to the real reason why this oversight was brought to the fore. Recent event of a rape incident at one of the university’s hostels and the peeing incident of a white student on the study material of a black student are the reasons why this report was pushed forward. The incident of gender-based violence falling under the radar to the more popular incident of race. We await the report on the incident which marred the institution and advocate for restorative justice. Transformation should be felt in one’s being, a transitional intertwining of university and community, a move away from just a black and white issue to the bigger picture of inclusive innovative progress. On a lighter note, and the committee will know, Candice King has spoken. Thank you, Chair. Ms N N CHIRWA / AR [01/06/2022] / TAKE ENDS AT 15:41 TAKE 999 - STARTS AT 15:41 Ms C V KING Ms N CHIRWA: Thank you, House Chair. It would not across our our imagination that between two months since this committee conducted an oversite visit to the Stellenbosch University we will be faced by a despicable incident of empty black racism even after receiving a firm caution and guidance on the racist Boeremark Afrikaner culture that characterise an institution that sit at the heart of the disposition of land of African people. One Theuns du Toit resolved to urinate on the belongings of an African child. He did this because he is the ultimate representative of the racist culture of Stellenbosch. His act was a conformation of what his institution thinks of black people - as being is not worthy of respect, humanity or dignity. The committee and this report reflect truth, Chairperson, of Stellenbosch being a centre for Afrikaner volkdom, which failed to attract black professionals and as a management structure riddles by white Afrikaner men. Women only occupied 40% of senior management positions while the representation of black African senior staff sit at a lousy 4%. The university could not and to date has not been able to provide a gender and racial breakdown of their dropout rate, which are likely to disproportionately affect black male and black female students who are subjected to the indecency of racism. In terms of all the metrics of equal representation of staff being and governance of institution, Stellenbosch University failed. This was an institution of predominantly black students. As is the case of frequently across the country, Stellenbosch University would have been long put under administration. There is clearly no intention by this institution to be African even while it exist in Africa and it exist as an exclaim of white priority complexes and it disrespect for black people. The decline in a need for indigenous languages reveals that black people have given up on Stellenbosch as a side to get education and in defence therefore, of all the African people who were urinated on by Theuns du Toit and its unnamed racism compatriot and there are many victims. The EFF reject this report, Chairperson. Thank you. Mr S L NGCOBO Ms N CHIRWA Mr S L NGCOBO: Thank you, hon Chairperson. The report of the Committee of Higher Education on a recent oversight to Stellenbosch University has not come at a more relevant time in South Africa’s social political space. The intent of this committee’s oversight was to access the university’s readiness for 2022 academic year. Yet, what they found there are issues of inadequate and slow transformation within the university. The committee had various presentation from senior professors regarding the issues of diversity, inclusion and transformation. In fact, in support of the university view that there has been progress, Mr A Moos, Chairperson of the University Council, stated that the University of Stellenbosch is committed to unity in diversity by inculcating tolerance of and respect for different perspectives and believes. Unfortunately, he is ... I am sorry, Chairperson. Something is just disturbing me. Unfortunately, he is and various other presenters were vaulted into the stack reality that a culture of racism, intolerance, diversity and superiority in the university, amongst some. This was brought to light when a white student Theuns du Toit felt it necessary to urinate on a black’s learner desk. The criminality of his actions show the proud display amongst fellow students that indeed there is a well-established base of racism within institution. And this cannot be tolerated. The actions by du Toit showed a hatred and undervaluing for black education and supported the sentiment made by the university’s the Student Representative Council, SRC, in arguing that transformation was indeed superficial. Only seven days ago, it was also reported that a student at the same university had been allegedly arrested on charges of rape. Now hon Chairperson, this brings into question the effectiveness and the commitment by the university that supposedly support out constitutional values in addressing transformation, unity, tolerance and respect as alluded by Mr Moos. More must be done and in fact imposed on the university under the prescripts of our Constitution. This university has been known ... Well, Chairperson, the ANC support the report. [Time expired.] Dr W J BOSHOFF Mr S L NGCOBO Afrikaans: Dr W J BOSHOFF: Dit is Wynand Boshoff van die VF Plus, agb Voorsitter. Om in die badkamer te urineer en nie op iemand se boeke of rekenaar nie, gaan oor maniere. Iemand wat dit doen verteenwoordig niemand nie. Hy wangedra hom en moet die gevolge dra. Verkragting is net so, maar erger. English: An oversight visit is always something to look forward to. Colleagues in the committee are attentive, eager to learn, critical in a well-natured way, and always witty. It is a pity we hardly ever agree. The oversight visit to the University of Stellenbosch is a case in point. Although we were terribly late, the chair apologised profusely and the university accepted it with dignity. Then they started with their presentations. All dignitaries did their best to project a highly transformed institution of high academic value. The university has a good idea of what the committee would like to hear and really wanted to say it. The numbers in the room did not quite reflect the numbers on the white board. The room looked quite transformed, the numbers less. And for my agile minded colleagues that was not difficult to detect. Now, we all know that Stellenbosch is the alma mater of several prime ministers and other key members of the pre-1994 establishment. The present management would rather that we see the university is a top performing research institution which is well governed and creates a third income stream. Also as the university of choice for all population groups which does not give preferential treatment to Afrikaans students The university’s nickname is not even Maties anymore, but the more “inclusive” word “Stellies”. Which made me chuckle as I thought of Simon van der Stel as a key figure in early colonial settlement – not so very inclusive. A perception developed in my mind that the people in Stellenbosch said: We want to remain an excellent academic institution. Make a list of everything we have to change to stay the same. Names of buildings? Check. Language policy? Check. The committee noted. The problem is that once one follows that route, one has accepted its premises. The most important one is that transformation demands that each institution should reflect the whole country’s population. The FF Plus insists that an Afrikaans higher education institution in the south and one in the north is justifiable – as recommended by Prof Jakes Gerwel about 20 years ago. But universities agreed that it need not be the case and ascended a treadmill of which the government has the speed control. My conclusion is that if this committee has to choose between quality and transformation, they will choose transformation every day. The FF Plus does not share that view and will not vote for the report. I thank you. Mr W M THRING / MALUTA 30/05/2022 / TH (Afr – 1/6/2022)/ TAKE ENDS AT 15:50 TAKE 1000 - STARTS AT 15:50 Dr W J BOSHOFF Mr W M THRING: House Chairperson, the ACDP notes that the committee, as part of its oversight mandate over the Post School Education and Training system, conducted an oversight visit to Stellenbosch University. The purpose of the oversight visit was to engage with the university’s management, council and stakeholders on the progress made with the university’s transformation journey. The ACDP positions that our tertiary institutions play an important role in moulding the minds and hearts of our young people and in so doing, are able to contribute meaningfully and positively to the many social ills and economic challenges facing South Africa. It is in this light that the ACDP has condemned the urinating incident at Stellenbosch, as a violation of the dignity and privacy of our student, Babalo, by a fellow student, Theuns du Toit. This must never be allowed to happen again, ever. The ACDP is aware that learning and culture is our largest national budget item of some R441,5 billion. Our unemployment rate however at 35,3% is one of the highest, with approximately 3,4 million or 35% out of 10,2 million young people aged between 15 and 24 not in education, employment or training. In the transformation space, the ACDP asserts that this presents a ticking time bomb, a crises of education, employment and training of young people in South Africa, which if not arrested, can only result in an escalation of social and economic ills in our country. The ACDP agrees with the committee’s recommendation for the development of a national plan for the implementation of the Language Policy Framework to secure dedicated funding to assist with the development of indigenous languages as languages for teaching and learning. We further welcome the recommendation that Higher Education institutions should refrain from introducing mandatory vaccination policies without reasonable consultation with all students and staff. The ACDP is not anti-vaccine, but pro-choice and as a result will continue to oppose any and all mandatory vaccine policies on campuses. The logic is simple: If both vaccinated and unvaccinated, are able to contract and transmit COVID-19, why discriminate against the unvaccinated who choose to exercise their constitutional right to bodily and psychological integrity. Finally, the ACDP asserts that we cannot have transformation for the sake of transformation. Transformation must be applied equitably, in that when applied, it must benefit all in South Africa - black and white. I thank you. Mr B N HERRON Mr W M THRING Mr B N HERRON: House Chair, the portfolio committee’s oversight report on the progress of the University of Stellenbosch’s transformation journey must obviously be considered in the context of the recent dehumanising and racist case of a white student breaking into a black student’s dorm room to urinate all over his things. While the university council and the management presented a firm commitment to the university’s transformation, it is the SRC’s leadership input that we should pay attention to; because the latest experience of the students’ community must be the measure ... [Inaudible.] ... claim progress of the transformation journey as credible. The report makes it clear that despite the transformation plans, the latest experience of the students’ community, is that there is lack of transformation and dated around the university and that the transformation ethics seems to be largely superficial. The lesson for all of us is that transformation plans are worthless if they are not translated into fundamental change. The progress of the transformation journey was exposed by the most recent racist incident, has not fully embedded in the university’s community. University community being the leadership, staff and the students had not achieved the tolerant and safe space for learning regardless of race or culture. What happened on the university’s campus is also a reflection of our South African society, where racism and intolerance still permeate. A duty to build a non-racial South Africa where we can all thrive rests with all of us. But, there is a duty on white South Africans to examine our place and our conduct to this beautiful and complex land of ours. And to reject those who seek to divide our fellow South Africans. As the Stellenbosch SRC leadership said: It’s about our mindset. We have somehow liked us to retreat to a ... [Inaudible.] ... that separate us from the project to rebuilding our country after centuries of oppression. They would like to see the project of building a thriving nation with common values and diminishing inequality as belonging to others who are ... [Inaudible.] ... on courage to complain and point fingers. The racist event at the university, despite our noble plans, their noble plans for transformation is a call to action. We all have to be part of the solution and building a country for all to prosper is not the work of others. Thank you. Mr M NYHONTSO Mr B N HERRON Mr M NYHONTSO: House Chairperson, we support the report. Thank you. Mr W T LETSIE Mr M NYHONTSO Sesotho: Mong W T LETSIE: Ke a leboha Modulasetulo. English: The ANC is dismayed by the perpetual emergence of the ugly head of racism at the University of Stellenbosch. The inhumane treatment by the white student, Du Toit, who urinated on another student’s belongings who is black, with resistance and no shame, demonstrate that our path at national reconciliation and social cohesion will continuously be diverted by institutional cultures, which embrace discriminate practices. We wish the student who experienced this act strength; and calls on the university to ensure that the student and all others affected are provided with various support to enable them to transcend this experience and continue their studies without no impairment. We welcome the suspension of Theuns du Toit, but far reaching consequences should be taken to communicate non tolerance to racism and it not belonging to any of our Higher Education institutions. The response of the University of Stellenbosch should be a thorough transformational process which acknowledges ... [Inaudible.] ... institutional racism which is embedded in various institutional cultural practices in the residents, sports, academia and its staff relations. They must expel him with others who continue to practice such despicable behaviour. Our oversight visit to Stellenbosch University was a stark reminder that 28 years into our democracy, we still have institutions which systematically maintained white dominance. Despite the university transformational key performance area constituting 20 to 25% of the total key performance areas, African academic staff is a below par 7% coloured staff and 14% and Indian staff at 3%. The university is a classically expression of the west characteristics of racial dominance and patriarchal state of our institutions. The university continues to pride itself as an enclave of African dominance rooted in the philosophy of ... [Inaudible.] ... university, which the idea of the establishment of the South African university to consolidate the social economic and cultural capital through Afrikaner nationalism. The university has 685 personnel and in terms of demographics, 486 of those are white, followed by 79 coloureds, 64 foreigners, 28 Africans and Indian staff. In terms of the distribution by gender since 2021, the university has 411 male senior personnel and only 274 female senior personnel. The university continues to reproduce its ... [Inaudible.] ... democratic structure through its enrolment which enrolled only 39% first years from historically disadvantaged South Africans, as the Chair would have alluded earlier. While 65% ... [Inaudible.] ... enrollers are white students. This happens despite black applicants being more than double the number of white applicants. Reflecting the systematic reproduction of dominance. When we raise this, Members of Parliament like hon Schreiber accuses us or attacking Afrikaans as a language and Afrikaner as people - how pedestrian. In this report we have made a recommendation for the development of indigenous language to strengthen them as languages of meaningful academic discourse and source of knowledge for various academic discipline in higher education. I hope that our hon members are listening. Just to correct hon King, we didn’t go to Stellenbosch because the DA has pushed us to. We went there because we go to all institutions and I’m worried that hon King has failed to call Stellenbosch, at least once, on their clear agenda of racism, I wonder why. The University of Stellenbosch should undertake a paradigm shift ... [Inaudible.] ... position itself as a South African institution. We support the oversight report. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] Debate concluded.