EFF CONDEMNS NATIONAL ASSEMBLY SPEAKER'S ILLEGAL AND CRIMINAL DECISION TO MUTE AND REMOVE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT ON THE VIRTUAL PLATFORM AND THE INSTRUCTION TO PHYSICALLY ASSAULT MEMBERS IN THE CHAMBER Thursday, 09 June 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters condemns in the strongest terms the disgusting, barbaric and dictatorship conduct of the Speaker of Parliament, who unilaterally and without quoting any rule of the National Assembly, muted over 289 Members of Parliament on the Parliamentary virtual platform. We further condemn the illogical, factional and suppressive decision, to remove the Commander in Chief, President and Party Leader of the EFF Julius Malema, along with the EFF Deputy President and Chief Whip Floyd Shivambu, from the virtual platform without just cause. There was a clear agenda to suppress the leadership of what is the only official opposition in Parliament, while other parties stood by silently, and allowed a money launderer and kidnapper to address the nation. Acting in defence of a money launderer, murderer, kidnapper, and torturer, the Speaker of the National Assembly, Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula undermined millions of South African voters, by gagging Public Representatives, to defend a corrupt Ramaphosa from accountability. It is now widely known legislation, that the virtual platform of Parliament is established as part of the Parliamentary precinct and when the National Assembly is in session, as part of the chamber. Furthermore, there is no rule that allows the Speaker to indefinitely deny Members of Parliament points of order. It is pure dictatorship, guesswork and partisanship, for the Speaker to decide when, where and how the President, in this case Ramaphosa, can be held accountable. Mapisa-Nqakula's actions are therefore unlawful, criminal and unconstitutional.  All Members of Parliament, whether they are in the house or in the virtual platform enjoy equal standing, powers, privileges and immunities. The Speaker followed no rule to deny Members on the virtual platform the right to speak. The over 289-Members who were in the virtual platform were not provided an opportunity to speak, nor were they warned prior to their effective exclusion from the house through being muted. Mapisa-Nqakula flouted the foundations of our representative democracy, and proceeded to call bouncers on Members of Parliament, to defend the man who presides over the modern day Vlakplaas known as Phala Phala farm. The EFF will not tire in the quest to ensure that Ramaphosa is held accountable, no matter what threats may be made against members or any physical violence that may be deployed by the blood thirsty Ramaphosa. We will confront him wherever he attempts to speak, because someone charged with breaking domestic and international laws, an individual charged with the abduction of people from one country and trafficking them to his personal Vlakplaas, has no right to address South Africans. Statement issued by the EFF, 9 June 2022