Dr De Maayer-allegations: DA will see for ourselves 20 June 2022 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite by Michele Clarke MP. The DA will write to the Minister of Health, Dr Joe Phaahla, regarding the protection of whistleblowers in the health sector. Minister Phaahla must explain the policies and systems that protect whistleblowers, as it seems clear from the treatment of Dr Tim De Maayer that the ANC government has no interest in protecting whistleblowers, nor do they have the well-being of South Africans at heart. This follows Dr De Maayer’s pending disciplinary action for revealing the state of decline of the Rahima Moosa Mother and Child hospital in an open letter, despite the fact that his suspension was lifted after public outrage. This attitude to avoid accountability seems to be shared by the parliamentary portfolio committee on heath. Twice the DA has written to the committee chair, Dr Kenneth Leonard Jacobs, to request the appearance of Dr De Maayer, the Rahima Moosa Hospital CEO, Nozuko Mkabayi, and the Gauteng MEC for Health, Dr Nomathemba Mokgethi, regarding the Dr De Maayer’s revelations of failings at the hospital. Dr Jacobs have yet to respond to our request for accountability. Given the ANC government’s lax attitude and penchant for punishing law-abiding whistleblowers, the DA will go see the true state of affairs for ourselves. While the ANC government and the CEO seem to have no appetite for ensuring quality health care, the DA takes our responsibility to the South African public seriously. We will not rest until the Gauteng Department of Health address the life-threatening concerns at the hospital. The fact that Dr De Maayer is facing disciplinary action despite being reinstated shows to which extent the transgressions are being concealed. The Gauteng Health Department’s time would be better spent supporting Dr De Maayer’s mission to ensure quality care for his patients, and not throwing him and other whistleblowers to the wolves. It is shameful that years of concerns from specialists and other health care workers at the Rahima Moosa hospital were simply swept aside. The South African public deserve better, as do whistleblowers like Dr De Maayer, without whom the public health care system would finally crumble. The ANC government’s attitude towards accountability is certainly an indication of the dire situation South Africans would face should the National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill come to pass. Issued by Michele Clarke, DA Shadow Minister of Health, 20 June 2022