Men accused of killing businessman Wandile Bozwana convicted 23 June 2022 A taxi boss, Vusi Reginald Mathibela (36), known as Vusi Khekhe, Sipho Patrick Hudla (40), Matamela Robert Mutapa (46) and Bonginkosi Paul Khumalo (42), have been convicted by the Pretoria High Court for killing a businessman Wandile Bozwana. All four men were found guilty of premeditated murder, attempted murder, possession of a firearm and possession of ammunition. On 02 October 2015, Hudla, Mutapa and Khumala, followed Bozwana, who was at Mandela Square in Sandton, Johannesburg with his business associate Betty Mpho Baloyi, on instruction by Mathibela. When Bozwana and Baloyi were leaving Sandton to drive back to Pretoria, they were using Baloyi’s car and she was driving. The three men continued to follow them until they reached the Garsfontein off-ramp, and the traffic lights were red. The three men got out of the BMW car they were driving and started shooting at Baloyi’s car and fled the scene. Both car occupants were shot; however, Baloyi managed to drive until she stopped at Garsfontein Road, when police and emergency services arrived. They were taken to the nearest hospital, where Bozwana later succumbed to his wounds. All four men were arrested on different dates, between 2015 and 2016. Three of the four men have been in custody since their arrest; however, Mathibela was granted R50 000 bail in December 2016, after he handed himself over at the Brooklyn Police Station. He was then re-arrested in 2019 after he violated his bail conditions, which were revoked and his bail money was forfeited to the state, and has been in custody since. In court, all four men pleaded not guilty to the charges against them. Adv. Jennifer Cronje told the court that she presented evidence to prove the guilt of the four men beyond reasonable doubt and that all four men had a common purpose in killing the deceased. DPP Adv. Mzinyathi welcomes the conviction, and praises the outstanding work of the investigating officer Sergeant Evans Butso Mongwe who started investigating the matter after the incident in 2015. The matter was postponed to 04 August 2022, for sentencing proceedings. Issued by Lumka Mahanjana, Regional Spokesperson, NPA, 24 June 2022