Solidarity wins case of hate speech against BLF  3 March 2022 The Equality Court in Johannesburg found BLF spokesperson, Lindsay Maasdorp, guilty of hate speech. This follows remarks on social media about the disaster that took place at Hoërskool Driehoek. BLF members said, among other things, that the death of three children was a divine intervention that got rid of three future problems. Dr Dirk Hermann, Chief Executive Officer of Solidarity explains: “Racial hatred must not just be left there, because when it is left, it becomes the norm. We must not allow racial hatred to be normalised. The statements of the BLF were a hate speech low point and if we left it there, we basically say it is acceptable. This ruling is sending out a message to other public figures, saying that there are consequences when they victimize innocent victims.” According to Solidarity, several parents and friends of the victims approached them to take legal action against Maasdorp after his remarks, in which he welcomed the death of the children, provoked wide reaction. "We must never forget that there are real, human consequences for such actions. We were approached on behalf of the bereaved families of Roydon Olckers, 17; Marli Currie, 14; and Marnus Nagel, 16 who tragically lost their lives during the incident. Four children lost their lives on February 1, 2019, and 20 others were injured,” says Hermann. "This judgement will never be able to heal their parents, but through their willingness to fight we can ensure that such disgusting remarks are punished and we may protect others from those who would find pleasure in celebrating the suffering and grief of others." Solidarity further explains that there has never been any doubt about the reprehensibility of the remarks of the BLF and its representatives, and this is confirmed by the ruling. “According to the verdict, these remarks were indeed racist, harsh, insensitive, barbaric, and made with the intention of hurting, causing damage and inciting racial hatred. The judge rightly noted that these remarks incite racial hatred. “In fact, the judge found that there can be no greater incitement to racial hatred than for someone to rejoice in the death of innocent children and celebrate it, simply because of their skin colour,” says Hermann. Solidarity argues that the ruling paves the way for further litigation to arrest other public figures over inappropriate and irresponsible statements. “The BLF’s actions are inexcusable. They made statements for the sake of cheap political points, which exploit existing trauma, and cause irreparable emotional damage and grief. However, they are not the only ones. This ruling is a huge victory for justice, but many more cases await so that we can deal a decisive and final blow to racial hatred – especially towards minorities,” Hermann concluded. To read the full judgment, click here. For a sound clip, click here. Issued by Morné Malan, Head of communication: Solidarity, 3 March 2022