DA condemns Operation Dudula violence against foreigners  29 March 2022 Note to Editors: Please find attached soundbite by Angel Khanyile MP. The DA condemns the xenophobic rhetoric and subsequent illegality and violence against foreigners in South Africa that seem part and parcel of Operation Dudula. While Operation Dudula’s mission might be to protect communities, it cannot be at the expense of foreign nationals who call South Africa home. Xenophobia should not be tolerated and indulged. Nor should criminal, violent and unjust activities against foreign migrants. The DA believes that if this "project" is allowed to continue unabated, it will very soon lead to exactly the kind of violence and unrest we saw in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng in July last year. The DA understands the frustration facing marginalized communities. But we do not believe that the appropriate course of action is xenophobia and violence. The fact is that the South African Police Service (SAPS) is riddled with corruption and ineptitude and does not have enough boots on the ground to address the myriad of problems that our communities face on a daily basis. Not only is it high time SAPS got its house in order, but increased support must be given to Community Policing Forums (CPFs) and a closer relationship must be fostered between SAPS and the communities they serve. At the moment, many communities experience SAPS only as part of the problem. Home Affairs must ensure the quick and correct processing of visas and other documentation. Using the Covid-pandemic as an excuse for incompetence will no longer suffice. Both South Africans and foreigners deserve better than the disdainful lack of service from this Department. Politicians, individuals and organizations that fan xenophobic flames must face the consequences of their deplorable actions. They will see the country in chaos again if only to score cheap political points. South Africa cannot afford another bout of widespread riots. Our economy is simply too fragile to withstand the attacks by individuals whose words fan the flames of unrest. The DA sincerely hopes that the State Security Agency has its ducks in a row and is monitoring the situation diligently and closely. Sentiments by political parties like Action SA, the Patriotic Alliance and the EFF cannot go unchallenged. Blaming foreigners for years of destruction caused by ANC greed and corruption is not only foolish and naïve, it is dangerous. And it ignores the reality that foreign migrants often create jobs and job opportunities for South Africans. The DA recently released our migration policy that advocates for opportunity not fear. Our policy addressed, amongst other things, these important issues: We need to do a better of job of enabling people to enter and remain legally; An advanced migration registry system must be implemented to properly document all migrants when entering or leaving the country; Officials who have been found guilty of involvement in migration corruption and fraud from working for any state agency or government department must be blacklisted and criminal charges must be laid against them; Introducing a trader’s permit/visa for all other African countries; and Supporting the roll out of an African passport. South Africa will not flourish while xenophobia persists and individuals, including some politicians, get away with spouting hatred and intolerance. Issued by Angel Khanyile, DA Shadow Minister of Home Affairs, 29 March 2022