SACP welcomes government response in favour of providing humanitarian aid to, and reiterates its solidarity with the people of Cuba 23 March 2022 The South African Communist Party (SACP) welcomes the statement by the Minister of International Relations and Co-operation, Dr Naledi Pandor, in response to the interim order granted by Judge Brenda Neukircher of the North Gauteng High Court pausing the implementation of the humanitarian aid that South Africa had agreed it would provide to the Republic of Cuba. On Wednesday, 23 March 2022, Dr Pandor made it clear that the department was studying the judgment and consulting with its legal representatives to prepare heads of argument for a return to court in 20 days’ time. Dr Pandor emphasised that the African Renaissance Fund does not provide money to any beneficiary but humanitarian aid, be it food, medical supplies, or other forms of support, and that the fund lies within the budget of the Department of International Relations and Co-operation and no other department. While the application by AfriForum against South Africa’s decision to provide humanitarian aid to Cuba appears to be a legal issue, the reality is that it is a political matter that goes far beyond that. This can be traced back to the apartheid era and apartheid sub-imperialism in Southern Africa. Between mid-August 1987 and the end of March 1988, Cuba defeated apartheid armed forces in Angola, in the historic Battle of Cuito Cuanavale. This led to the independence of Namibia and the transition from apartheid to the current democratic dispensation in South Africa. Intransigent beneficiaries of the racist regime of apartheid remain anti-Cuba, because of that. Besides the defeat of apartheid forces by Cuba in the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale, the people of Cuba in exercising their national sovereignty chose their own trajectory, that of building a socialist transition from capitalist barbarity and safeguarding Cuban independence from imperialism. The imperialist regime of the United States reacted by imposing an illegal blockade on Cuba. Imperialist agents in different countries seek to extend the extra-territorial impact of the illegal blockade, which the United Nations General Assembly has been condemning year in, year out. The SACP pledges its unwavering solidarity with the people and government of Cuba. We will strengthen our independent support for and deepen our fraternal ties with the Cuban people. Nothing whatsoever from the ranks of apartheid beneficiaries or imperialism will temper with our solidarity with the Cuban people. Issued by Alex Mohubetswane Mashilo, SACP Central Committee Member: Media & Communications, 23 March 2022