2.6 million people are unemployed in Gauteng, while the government rests on its laurels 30 March 2022 2 612 000 residents of Gauteng are unemployed and a further 848 000 have given up hope of finding a job. This brings the unemployment rate to a staggering 36,6%. This is a clear indication that our people are suffering and are struggling to put food on the table. This information was revealed in the fourth quarter Labour Force Survey for 2021 that was released earlier this week. This is very concerning as it is evident that not enough is being done by the Gauteng Provincial Government (GPG) to ensure that sufficient employment opportunities are created for our unemployed residents in the province. To address the inequality in our society, cc. Under the leadership of Premier David Makhura, it is clear that this political will does not exist and our economy will continue to decline. Recently it came to light that the Gauteng Department of Economic Development failed to meet its ICT job creation target which was set at 20 000 for the third quarter of the 2021/2022 financial year. It is opportunities like these that help to alleviate unemployment, particularly amongst our youth who are in desperate need of jobs. The GPG must ensure that the correct environment for the private sector to invest in the economy is created by ensuring that skills training and development takes place. It cannot be that we have a situation where our unemployed residents particularly the youth are crying out for employment and skills development opportunities that are blatantly being ignored by the GPG. The DA is demanding that all government departments especially the Department of Economic Development starts meeting its job creation and skills development training targets set for the year. I will also be raising these concerns through the Portfolio of Economic Development Committee at the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. Issued by Makashule Gana, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Economic Development, 30 March 2022