EFF statement on Gauteng High Court decision interdict R50 million donation to Cuba 23 March 2022 The EFF has noted the judgement by the Gauteng High Court, which has interdicted the South African government from donating R50 million to the people of Cuba. The notoriously compromised Gauteng High Court, has prematurely succumbed to baseless and misinformed arguments by the racist lobby group known as Afriforum, which has categorised an intervention into the economic woes of a committed partner in a liberation struggle, as wasteful expenditure. It is a verifiable fact of history that the people of Cuba have made the ultimate sacrifices for the liberation of Africa from the clutches of colonialism. Cuba has made a global impact on spreading humanitarianism and practical support for nations who have been deliberately underdeveloped and conquered by the West. It is Cuba that has sent doctors and medical aid all across the world whilst being under the massive pressure of sanctions and trade embargoes, for its socialist economic policies. At the Battle of Cuito Canavale in Angola, it was Cuban detachments who assisted in the historic war, which decisively undermined the influence of colonial and Apartheid forces in Southern Africa. It was due to Cuban military aid, that the first steps towards liberation were made in the region. Cuba is therefore suffering the consequences of aligning with the struggle for Independence of Africa, through sanctions, and we must never abandon them when they need our assistance the most. The money which is set to be donated to Cuba is not towards politicians, it is to the people of Cuba, who sent their sons and daughters to Africa in our defence, who will receive our aid. The EFF, as an organisation inspired by the great 26 July Revolution of Cuba, will always stand with the people of Commandante Fidel Castro, Che Guevara, Vilma Espin and Raul Castro. We are an organisation that is inspired by the determination of the Cubans to build strong pharmaceutical capacity, invest in education and increase literacy rates, in the face of aggression from the United States and capitalist interests. The EFF will therefore join the opposition of the final review application in the matter relating to the R50 million donation to Cuba. We do this to directly oppose the attempt by racists to set aside the decision to donate money to Cuba, in order to stifle aid to our compatriots. We have accordingly instructed our legal team to finalise an application speedily. We must appreciate the relations built with Cuba, which are undoubtedly ties of blood. There is no amount of money that can account for the sacrifice the Cubans made towards our freedom. We must never betray what this great nation has done, by allowing racists who have no concern about African life in South Africa, to tell us that relations with our brothers and sisters in revolution, amount to wasteful expenditure. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 23 March 2022