Some definite wins for the DA in the Gauteng 2022/2023 budget  9 March 2022 The Democratic Alliance in Gauteng is concerned that the public sector wage agreement for the 2022/2023 year will be taking most of the additional funding allocated to the province. While the wage bill is currently is on 57% with the ceiling at 60%, it will remain a challenge to stay within the ceiling. The MEC for Finance, Nomantu Nkomo-Ralehoko recognises that we are in a tough fiscal position and we need to see that the budget reflects this instead of only talk and no action. Whilst we are still battling the devasting impact of the Covid-19 pandemic it is now crucial that immediate attention be given to the rebooting of the economy in Gauteng. We are pleased to see that the Gauteng Traffic Service will now be made a 24-hour service. This is very important if we want to safeguard our residents of Gauteng. The DA has for a long time been fighting for this as hijackings are huge problem in our province. While the MEC for Finance mentioned the ICT sector and the 4th Industrial Revolution, we need to develop a stronger ICT skills pipeline and broaden digital access to all sectors of society. Access to ICT and skills should by now be seriously considered a human right. The Department of Human Settlements has been allocated an amount R453.6 million; we hope to see that this year the housing backlog is greatly reduced so that our residents can have access to proper dignified housing. In terms of gender-based violence, the DA is pleased see that R225.3 million has been allocated for this programme. This is critical if we want to fight the scourge of GBV in our province, which has now been exacerbated by the current economic climate in the province as well as the Covid-19 pandemic. Furthermore, it is critical that we fight poverty in our province and this is why the allocation for food insecure people, as well as school uniforms and dignity packs is critical if we want our learners to be at school every day so that they are able to complete their schooling without missing any school days because of the socio-economic situation they find themselves in. The Tshepo 1 Million programme is crucial if we want to help particularly our unemployed youth find employment opportunities that will equip them with the skills needed to find long-term employment or to start their own businesses, yet we do not see the fruits of this investment in our province. It is also very disheartening to note that the Department of Health has not received any additional funding for the 2022/2023 budget and its’ allocation remains at R59 426 398 for this financial year. A second adjustment budget was tabled today. This serves as a bailout for the health department to meet all their financial obligations for the current financial year. Currently the province has a high unemployment rate and Special Economic Zones (SEZs) play a crucial role in alleviating unemployment. The allocation of R445.5 million to the Tshwane Automotive Hub is welcomed, but we need to get to a point where all SEZs are fully operational and providing employment opportunities to our residents. This is also important if we want the private sector to invest in our economy. The DA will be closely monitoring the implementation of this year’s budget and will demand that every rand spent is value for money, so that we can ensure that our taxpayers’ money is not wasted. For the DA, accountability from the executive and officials is now of paramount importance to ensure that every rand spent will result effective service delivery to our residents. Issued by Adriana Randall, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Finance and e-Government, 9 March 2022