Ramaphosa’s Cabinet must go: 5 Reasons for the DA’s Motion of No Confidence in Nathi Mthethwa 25 March 2022 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite by Veronica Van Dyk MP Parliament will debate and vote on a DA sponsored Motion of No Confidence in President Cyril Ramaphosa’s cabinet next week, on Wednesday the 30th of March. The DA believes that since this Cabinet has collectively failed to fulfil their duties, they must go. South Africans have become accustomed to Ministers who do not understand the responsibilities, duties and mandates of their respective departments. One such person is the Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, Nathi Mthethwa. Few people can contest that Mthethwa is as out of depth in his current Ministry, as he was as the Minister of Police. After the Marikana massacre, he should never have been appointed as a Minister of anything. Failure in one field, is rewarded with a position in another, as is customary with the ANC. Here are five reasons why Mthethwa should be fired: The Marikina Massacre: Whilst Minister of Police, Mthethwa’s department was responsible for the most lethal use of force South Africa has ever experienced against its own citizens since 1976! He was personally mentioned in the Commission of Inquiries report several times. Handling of Covid-19 lockdowns and pandemic: Under his watch, the arts and culture industry was one of the hardest hit industries in South Africa with very little support. Those in arts and culture struggled day to day to survive under the unfair and illogical lockdown conditions and still continue to struggle today. Declaring Nkandla a National key Point: Whilst Minister of Police, Mthethwa declared Jacob Zuma’s fire pool and cattle kraal a National Key Point. Former Public Protector, Thuli Mandonsela, found that he failed to apply his mind correctly and that his actions constituted improper conduct and maladministration. His failure to direct Zuma to implement security measures at his own cost or to properly modify the declaration cost the taxpayers of South Africa millions of Rands. Sleeping on the job: Mthethwa was caught sleeping during a Parliamentary debate on Human Rights Day, ironically, while citizens in the arts and culture industry have been refused their basic human rights of being able to earn a living under the strict lockdown conditions. His clear lack of respect on such an important day is a slap in the face of those who are trying their best to make an honest living and support their families. Mismanagement of R300 million meant for struggling artists: During the strict covid-19 lockdowns and unreasonable regulations, Mthethwa’s Arts and Culture department oversaw the mismanagement and misappropriation of R300 million which was meant for the starving and struggling artists who desperately needed those funds to live whilst struggling under the strict lockdown conditions. South Africa cannot continue to suffer under Mthethwa’s incompetence and complete disregard for the wellbeing of ordinary citizens of South Africa. He must be removed immediately. Issued by Veronica van Dyk, DA Deputy Shadow Minister for Sports, Arts and Culture, 25 March 2022