EFF wishes Cic Julius Sello Malema a revolutionary happy birthday  3 March 2022 On the 3rd of March 1981, in the midst of heightened tension in South Africa and the greatest instability waged against the Apartheid Regime, a leader of the next phase of our struggle against colonial conquest was born. At the tender age of 9-years old, when this country was on the edge of transitioning to democracy, the Commander in Chief formed part of the critical stages of the struggle for liberation. He would go on to lead the youth in agitating for a democracy that is characterised by a return of the wealth of this country to the hands of African people He has been a consistent force in the body politic of South Africa, leading the charge in the call for Economic Freedom in Our Lifetime. The Commander in Chief has shaken the corridors of power, to a point where the ruling capitalists of South Africa have come out and openly involved themselves in the political arena, because of his influence. He was in his twenties, when the leader of the Stellenbosch Mafia called his collective which was waging a war for the return of our economy, an irritation that needs to be attended to with Doom.. He remains the only person to lead a monumental march from Johannesburg to Pretoria, the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), Chamber of Mines and Union Buildings, demanding economic freedom with thousands of youth. Today, exactly 10-years after the white-monopoly capital and the ruling party attempted to destroy him for demanding the expropriation of land without compensation, and the nationalisation of mines banks and strategic sectors of our economy, CIC Julius Malema leads the third largest political party in the country. He remains a thorn in the side of the corrupt political elite, and the handlers who seek to turn South Africa into a colony of private interests. He remains a pain to racists all across the country, the continent and the diaspora, as he leads the charge for a United Africa, a call which unsettles colonial nations such as France which seek to micro-manage African affairs. Today racist organisations, in collaboration with the ruling party, are on a permanent quest to crush the CIC Julius Malema, by weaponizing investigative authorities and the courts, in a shallow attempt to remove him as the legitimate leader of the dejected masses of our people. He observes his 41st Birthday in the East London Magistrates Court, because racists in collusion with the State, are in a desperate mission to persecute him for his principled vision of a prosperous Africa The EFF assures the Commander in Chief that we are with him, and any attempt to attack him will be met by a firm resistance by our glorious movement and African people. We assure the Commander in Chief that we will give him the gift of genuine liberation, and this begins by building vibrant branches and capturing the imagination of our people. towards 1 Million Members by the end of 2022. This is to ensure that his vision of dignity for the black child is achieved, and we no longer live like step-children in the land of their birth. No racist agenda will succeed in destroying the EFF under the capable leadership of our President. The President of the EFF remains an anchor in our political journey towards reversing the gains of colonialism and achieving true freedom. He is an inspiration and a force to be reckoned with, and today we celebrate an incredible life characterised by resilience, tenacity and commitment to the working class and the poor. Happy Birthday President Julius Malema, o kgole o kgole Moshabi! Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 4 March 2022