DA probes Alexkor’s diver miner safety  4 March 2022 Note to Editors: Please find attached English and Afrikaans soundbites by Veronica van Dyk MP. The Democratic Alliance (DA) is concerned about the safety of the diver miners working at Alexkor’s controversial cofferdams and we are probing the state-owned mine’s compliance to the Mine Health & Safety Act amidst the risk posed to divers by the unlicensed dumping of quarry sand into the ocean. This comes after four concerning incidents already occurred since the start of the year, including allegations that a diver fell unconscious after surfacing on 23 February, while on the previous day, a diver became partially paralysed after surfacing. Two serious hand injuries were also reported. Alexkor RMC JV conceded last year that mining in South Africa in general was having its worst year in terms of safety and fatalities when compared to the last three years. They further indicated that they should not put profits above the safety of their people. Yet, they are doing nothing to decrease the risks and better ensure the safety of diver miners, while the odds of very serious or even fatal accidents are growing. A week ago, I submitted letters to the Minister of Public Enterprises, Pravin Gordhan, and the Safety Manager at Alexkor, Mr Losper. While the flooding of the Orange River may have aggravated the situation, conditions were already poor before this and I have therefore asked that a proper investigation be conducted into the cause of these accidents and the possible causal links to the loss of underwater working visibility due to the unlawful dumping in the general area of operations. The investigation should include a risk assessment of the hazards created by cofferdam mining operations of Ambicor, especially at Blok 60. I have further requested relevant documentation in respect of Section 11 of the Mine Health & Safety Act. I am still waiting for a response, the failure of which will leave me with no choice but to report the matter to the Department of Minerals and Resources, which is responsible for ensuring compliance to mining safety. Alexkor is already facing criminal charges laid by the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and the Environment for non-compliance with environmental legislation, following pressure by the DA in respect of extensive pollution and damage to the environment. They must act now, if they not only want to avoid further criminal charges but care enough to prevent underwater accidents and the potential loss of life. Issued by Veronica van Dyk, DA Constituency Head: Kamiesberg, 4 March 2022