Minister Mthethwa must engage National Command Council to allow more fans in stadiums  17 March 2022 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite by Tsepo Mhlongo MP The DA calls on the Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, Nathi Mthethwa to urgently engage with the National Command Council (NCC) to ask for the regulations on the sports industry to be relaxed. This comes amid rising concerns that the extension of the National State of Disaster would further devastate the sports industry, which has been severely hit by the State's imposed lockdown restrictions, some of which make absolutely no sense all. Despite the relaxation of regulations in other areas, the sports sector has received no respite and has been subjected to greater restrictions with no scientific justification. This has had a significant impact on the bottom line of the industry, as events such as soccer, rugby, cricket, and others are now limited to a fraction of 2000 fans in attendance. Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma's irrational announcement that the SOD will be extended by another month means that sporting events will continue to be affected in the coming month. So, for example the cricket test later this month between the Proteas and Bangladesh will still only allow 2000 spectators: a ridiculous regulation for which there is no justification at all. Every sporting event with a small fan base of 2,000 is a waste of money. This could lead to further job losses and might result closer of some business in the sport industry value chain. The NCC must take South Africa into its confidence and explain why the cap of 2000 fans continues to be imposed despite easing of restrictions in other sectors. The DA asks the Minister to work with the NCC to completely open the stadiums for the return of spectators, as this would assist to resuscitate the industry and allow individuals whose enterprises are tied to the sports industry to make a living. The DA has always said that we must find a balance in our response to the Covid-19 pandemic, ensuring that, while saving lives is our first priority, we also do everything possible to protect livelihoods. Issued by Tsepo Mhlongo, DA Shadow Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, 17 March 2022