This month’s hate speech court battle between Afriforum and Julius Malema was pulsating. The trial adjourned on Friday upon conclusion of evidence, the parties will at some stage make closing arguments. Public opinion has been divided as to who came out on top, there was far more at stake than a legal declarator on hate speech. Judge Edwin Molahlehi’s eventual hate speech judgment will likely only be academically relevant; a far more important verdict will come from voters at the 2024 national election polls. The hate speech question was a side-show. The true subject matter of the trial, as far as voters are concerned, was the EFF’s maturity and suitability for national power. Two battles played out: a technical legal hate speech question and the more enthralling unofficial interrogation as to whether the EFF is mature enough for national government. Malema was predictably bombastic and antagonistic in the witness box, making for enthralling televised viewing. Regarding hate speech, the EFF can politically spin a victory irrespective of the verdict. If Malema loses, he is a victim and target of a ‘white monopoly capital controlled judiciary’. Prevailing will leave him vindicated in the face of Afriforum’s ‘white oppression.’ In terms of 2024 propaganda, the EFF did itself no favours. In 2019 it achieved a remarkable 10.7% of the national vote. Improving on this figure requires proving to voters that the EFF is not the Zanu PF’s twisted cousin. Malema’s witness box antics did the precisely the opposite, confirming that the red berets are just as poisonous a prospect. Afriforum’s advocate, Mark Oppenheimer, ran circles around Malema during cross examination, overwhelmingly proving hate speech and inadvertently confirming that the EFF is totally unsuited to the responsibility of national power. The saying goes: ‘give a cross examined witness enough rope to hang themself’, which Malema and the EFF managed to do in a most entertaining fashion. His examination in chief included a great deal of EFF propaganda regarding its planned governance strategy once it takes presidential power. This evidence had nothing to do with the hate speech, an obvious attempt to use the televised trial as a political propaganda exercise. Evidence at cross-examination is strictly limited to the testing of evidence canvassed during examination in chief or to the testing of materially contradictory opposing evidence. The EFF’s examination in chief propaganda opened the door for Oppenheimer to cross examine Malema on his plans and attitudes were he elected president. Though these aspects were not initially relevant to hate speech, Oppenheimer skilfully made them relevant via hemming in on the context of hate speech. He masterfully extracted from Malema fatal implied concessions regarding racial genocide, which laid a foundation for what will be a killer blow during closing argument regarding the context of “kill the boer”. Malema failed in the witness box to appreciate that the context of an utterance being relevant to hate speech is a double edged sword. He stated in chief that context matters because he was “chanting” a culturally important struggle song. On the other hand during cross-examination he refused to condemn the slaughter of white people. He also failed under cross examination to retract his infamous June 2018 “we are not calling for the slaughter of white people, at least for now” televised statement. Most damning was Malema’s rejection of an opportunity to undertake not to commit racial genocide. Section 10 of the Equality Act defines hate speech as speech that, inter alia, ‘could reasonably be construed’ to be ‘be harmful or incite harm’. The intent of the statement maker is irrelevant if it could reasonably be construed as harmful or inciting harm. Malema cannot have his cake and eat it in terms of context. If the public knows that he refuses to condemn white genocide and refuses to undertake not to commit it, then this clearly increases the likelihood that “kill the boer” could reasonably be construed to be harmful or incite harm. At the time of singing the song in public, it was well known that he had in 2018 admitted by implication that the EFF may at some stage call for the slaughter of whites. One cannot thus divorce the context of his 2018 televised genocidal viewpoint from the context of the chant being purely cultural. Even if it really is a harmless struggle song, it would not reasonably be perceived as such because it is Malema that was singing it. The EFF’s express refusal to condemn the slaughter of white people is now openly in the public eye after the televised trial, a political own goal. There is now a greater risk that “kill the boer” will be interpreted with even more devastating genocidal consequences, the moderate voter base is aware of this and will likely not vote EFF as an illustration of disgust. Evidence lead by one of Afriforum’s experts at this trial found via surveys that most South Africans have no problem with people of other races. The majority of South African voters are not extremists, they seek a moderate steady hand: the antithesis of the Zanu PF. The EFF’s spin doctors got this one wrong, or more likely- the nation witnessed the limits of Malema’s political nous and intelligence. He was totally flustered and bamboozled by Oppenheimer’s intellectual slow poison. Malema’s plight in the witness box was exemplified by his calling Oppenheimer “a weak lawyer”, this is not a good look for a future state president, an unbefitting aggressive reversion to type. He will live to regret his lack of composure and failure to expressly condemn the slaughter of white people. It was either too tempting to appease EFF hardliners or he botched the propaganda script under the pressure of cross-examination. It is also possible that Malema was on script, underestimating the appetite for a radical offering. He is too intelligent not to try to fix the mess via a retraction leading up to 2024. The problem is that he made those utterances with aggressive conviction under sworn oath in open court. Millions of moderate voters will not be easy to convince, they have proven to be extremely discerning at the polling station in abandoning the flailing ANC and refusing to vote EFF. The one good thing achieved by the ANC post 1994 was the creation of a robust constitutional democracy- instilling on the ground a culture whereby human and voting rights are sacred. A call to racial genocide is barbaric and has no place in a robust constitutional democracy. 2022 South Africa is not Zimbabwe in the late 1970s or Rwanda in the early 90s. A call to white genocide is a tired chestnut, employed in Africa only by out of touch politically desperate post-colonial hard liners. South African voters have moved on from the violent racial tensions of the 70s, and so should the EFF. This article first appeared on BusinessLive.