Office of Premier David Makhura misleads Gauteng residents about Charlotte Maxeke Hospital 10 March 2022 It is extremely disheartening that the Office of the Premier, via the acting Director General, told protestors at the Charlotte Maxeke Hospital that the delayed refurbishment after the fire was the subject of a SIU investigation. According to the SIU this is not the case. The refurbishments became necessary after a devasting fire ripped through the hospital last year. It is worrying that there are now delays in reopening the hospital which is adding further pressure on our already constrained public health system and there appears to be no urgency from provincial government to ensure that this hospital is fully up and running as soon as possible. During this crisis, both Premier Makhura and Tasneem Motara the MEC for Infrastructure, have been harshly criticised for a lack of transparency and communication, leaving medical professionals and patients in the dark as to the cause of the fire, quality of planning of the restoration and expected completion date of the project. These cynical actions have robbed the users of the health services of trust. A lack of skill and expertise in the Department of Infrastructure Development is a major contributor towards the delay of the hospital's restoration. In addition, organisations such as Section 27 and Defend our Democracy, claim that corruption is part of the toxic mix. An article in a daily newspaper suggests that a criminal syndicate exists in the upper echelons of the Department of Infrastructure Development. The DA is demanding that Premier Makhura respond by requesting an extended presidential proclamation for the SIU to investigate the delay. In addition, this investigation should extend to all contracts of the Department of Infrastructure Development as well as the existence of criminal syndicates in the department. Issued by Alan Fuchs, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Infrastructure Development and Property Management, 10 March 2022