Multi-disciplinary 'Operation Restore' leads to arrest of over 400 suspects in different parts of Johannesburg 12 March 2022 Police in Gauteng in collaboration with other law enforcement agencies remain on high alert and continue to maintain high visibility in different parts of Johannesburg District following the swift stabilisation of the situation in Alexandra this past week. Led by Gauteng's Acting Provincial Commissioner, Major General Girly Mbele, the multi-disciplinary deployment made up of the SAPS, Department of Home Affairs, Department of Labour, Gauteng Traffic Police, and the Johannesburg Metro Police Department, flooded the streets of Alexandra, Diepkloof and Hillbrow on Friday, 11 March 2022. This led to the arrest of over 400 people for various crimes. About 380 of the arrested suspects were foreign nationals suspected to be in the country illegally and they were handed over to Immigration Officials from the Department of Home Affairs for further processing and verification of their status in the country. In Alexandra, a total of 167 suspects were arrested while 179 suspects were arrested in Diepkloof and 70 in Hillbrow during the blitz Operation Restore intervention. Suspects were arrested for various crimes that include: possession of drugs, possession of live ammunition, possession of counterfeit money, dealing in liquor without license, assault with intent to cause grievous bodily harm (GBH), rape, and violation of road traffic regulations including driving while under the influence of a substance. Different types of drugs, liquor, counterfeit cigarettes and live ammunition were confiscated during the operations. Meanwhile, Mduduzi Mokoena (30), Martin Machete (40), Nduduzo Ntombela (45), Luvuyo Matuwane (27), George Tchomfa (37) and Tommie Fox (50) were earlier in the week arrested for public violence in Alexandra. They remain in custody pending their bail application which was postponed in Court to 17 March 2022. A seventh suspect, who was found in possession of a toy gun is yet to appear before court. While the situation has been stabilised and remains calm, police will continue with high visibility and high density operations parallel to normal crime prevention and combatting interventions such as the integrated Operation O Kae Molao. Members of the public are encouraged to continue to collaborate with the police and report any suspicious persons and activities by calling the Crime Stop number 08600 10111 or via the MySAPS app that can be downloaded onto any smartphone. Issued by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Netshiunda, SAPS Gauteng, 12 March 2022