EFF rejects Cyril Ramaphosa’s attempt to suspend Public Protector 18 March 2022 The EFF rejects Cyril Ramaphosa's premature and dictatorial attempt to suspend Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, citing the pending parliamentary inquiry into her fitness to hold public office. In yet another move to misuse his prerogative to side-line and destroy an African woman, Ramaphosa has taken advantage of the process instituted by Parliament to deal with an individual he views as a political opponent. The letter demanding that Mkhwebane pleads her case to not be suspended is a veiled threat, and an effective removal of the Public Protector before a democratic institution can appraise itself on her performance, and whether she is capable of occupying that office. It is an implementation of the factional and undemocratic step-aside policy of his ruling party, at the level of the State, which finds people guilty until proven innocent. It is an objective fact that Busisiwe Mkhwebane has been unwavering in her mandate to hold those in power accountable, and she has done so indiscriminately, implicating Ramaphosa and his allies. To suspend her is therefore a measure to strip the Office of the Public Protector of its teeth. It is premature, rushed and leads us to conclude that it is a decision taken out of fear, rather than being based on rationality. The Parliamentary inquiry into the Public Protector must be given time to do its work, and this work will undoubtedly include a discussion of matters relating to the President himself. He is therefore compromised and conflicted, and cannot make any objective decision relating to a Chapter 9 institution that has investigated matters relating to him. South Africans must wake up to the reality that the sitting President is a compromised individual who has weaponised state institutions to pave a clear path towards a second term. His desire for power makes him destructive, and he is willing to destroy institutions, create vacancies and operate like a dictator, to ensure that anyone who dares to oppose him, is removed. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 18 March 2022