Comair cancels flights as CAA extends suspension Sunday, March 13, 2022 12:53:00 PM 13 March 2022: Comair is unable to confirm when it will start flying again as the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) has indefinitely suspended its operating licence until such time as the SACAA has had time to review and satisfy themselves that the items are closed. This is despite the airline working through the night to provide documentation the SACAA had requested following a review of certain policies, systems and procedures. Comair was advised of a 24-hours suspension to its licence on the morning of 12 March. That afternoon the CAA requested additional information, which Comair provided overnight and into the early morning of 13 March 2022. “We have since received an acknowledgment that the information has been received, but no other formal communication has been received to date. In the interim the CAA has issued a press release saying it will be reviewing and assessing the documents provided,” says Glenn Orsmond, Comair CEO. “This is a huge blow to our customers, employees and the flying public as it effectively takes 40% of the capacity out of the market. The implications for the aviation sector and the country are considerable should the suspension continue for any length of time.” He says the airline is continuing to engage the SACAA in a bid to get the suspension lifted but has been forced to cancel flights indefinitely as it cannot say when this may be. “Our priority now is to assist passengers who have been stranded. We have chartered two aircraft to assist vulnerable passengers and those who most urgently need to travel.” Customers will be kept informed via SMS. For customers on British Airways (operated by Comair) flights, British Airways’ booking with confidence policy will apply. Details can be found here: www.britishairways.com/travel/book-with-confidence/public/en_gb Customers may also contact the Contact Centre on BAContactCentre@comair.co.za. kulula.com customers can rebook with no change penalties, subject to availability of the same fare class. Customers wishing to rebook should e-mail MNContactCentre@comair.co.za. Comair will continue to keep customers updated. Previous: Comair to start flying by midday Sunday subject to CAA approval Saturday, March 12, 2022 8:16:00 PM 12 March 2022; Comair aims to resume its British Airways (operated by Comair) and kulula.com schedule by 12:00 tomorrow, subject to SA Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) approval. The SACAA suspended Comair flights on a precautionary basis on 12 March 2022 for 24 hours after a review of certain policies, systems and procedures. On 11 March 2022 Comair responded to the SACAA’s concerns raised that day but was then asked to provide additional documentation on 12 March 2022. “We are doing everything possible to get the suspension lifted. We continue to engage constructively with the CAA and are working hard to provide the CAA with the additional information it requires,” says Comair CEO Glenn Orsmond. Although the airline is working with the CAA towards getting the suspension lifted before 12:00, planning to resume flights at midday will give it enough time to make arrangements to run as normal a schedule as possible. Comair says it will be doing everything it can to accommodate customers affected by the suspension on other flights, prioritising vulnerable customers and those who most urgently needed to travel. Customers will be kept informed via SMS. “We understand the frustration and inconvenience this has caused and are doing everything we can to assist.” For customers on British Airways (operated by Comair) flights, British Airways’ booking with confidence policy will apply. Details can be found here: www.britishairways.com/travel/book-with-confidence/public/en_gb Customers may also contact the Contact Centre on BAContactCentre@comair.co.za. kulula.com customers can rebook with no change penalties, subject to availability of the same fare class. Customers wishing to rebook should e-mail MNContactCentre@comair.co.za. Comair will continue to keep customers updated. Previous: Suspension of Comair services for 24 hours Saturday, March 12, 2022 2:30:00 PM Comair regrets that the South African Civil Aviation Authority has suspended all the company’s British Airways (operated by Comair) and kulula.com flights for 24 hours. Comair is engaging and working with the CAA on an urgent basis to get the suspension lifted. We are very sorry for the inconvenience this has caused our customers and are doing our utmost to restore operations as soon as possible. We will keep customers informed via our website and social media channels. Customers booked on flights for Saturday 12 March are advised not to travel to the airport. We will advise affected customers soon on the options available to them. Issued by Comair on 12 and 13 March 2022