Premier Alan Winde on provincial cabinet’s condemnation of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine 9 March 2022 This morning, the Western Cape’s provincial cabinet met to consider a range of important matters. This meeting takes place every two weeks. One issue of concern that was discussed was the illegal invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation and the ambiguous position taken by our National Government in response to it. It was accordingly decided that the provincial cabinet would adopt a clear position on this conflict. While doing so is not common for a province, it was viewed as essential to make clear to our own residents, to the people of Ukraine, and to the rest of the world that we cannot and will not remain “neutral” in the face of such a cruel attack on the democratic values that we all hold dear. Accordingly, we resolved that: The Western Cape Government strongly condemns the government of the Russian Federation for its invasion of Ukraine. The Western Cape Government considers the aggression by the government of the Russian Federation a violation of international law, and we call for an immediate ceasefire and for a full withdrawal of their armed forces from Ukraine. While condemning the attack on the sovereignty of Ukraine, we also acknowledge that many Russian citizens are themselves standing up and protesting against this war, and thousands have been arrested as a result. This anti-democratic clampdown also requires condemnation in the strongest terms. The provincial cabinet further resolved that: I will seek to meet with the Ukrainian Ambassador to South Africa to communicate this position unequivocally; No Russian Embassy or Consulate official or their staff will be invited to any event or meeting organised by the Western Cape Government; and The Western Cape Government will not attend any events or meetings organised by the Russian Embassy or any of its Consulates. I repeat again: we cannot and will not remain silent in the face of an international crisis that threatens the very foundation of our liberal international order. Issued by Western Cape Provincial Government, 9 March 2022