MBALI NTULI I have tendered my resignation from the DA and as an MPL in the KZN Legislature 15 years ago when I started in the DA, launching its first branch at Rhodes University, I did so because I truly believed that South Africans needed a change from the hegemony of the incumbent government. It is my fervent belief in change that has guided my time as a public representative and community leader for more than a decade. It is what occasioned my bid to become the leader of the Democratic Alliance. Change is good. It provides an opportunity for reflection and renewal. It is in that spirit that I, today, inform you that I have formally tendered my resignation as a member of the Democratic Alliance and member of the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature. My decision to do so was not one I came to lightly but one that is necessary for my growth as a community leader. To my colleagues I want to sincerely thank you for contributing to my journey and learning over the last 15 years. I joined the DA when I was 19 and was organising on campus. From being an early Young Leader, to starting the Rhodes University chapter, building and leading the DA Youth, and growing the party’s presence across tertiary institutions and youth structures – I was able to interact with many young people of different backgrounds, with the same dream for South Africa. I enjoyed building some of the first township branches eThekwini and working as a DA staff member before becoming a public representative. I became a councillor after standing as a candidate for the Ntuzuma hostels, but eventually servicing the community of Bhambhayi, Phoenix settlement, and eK’phakameni eNanda. I particularly enjoyed my years in youth leadership as the DA Youth’s first national chairperson and later the Youth leader. I am proud of the many leaders recruited during that time, from across the country, who have grown to become formidable leaders in the organisation today. I relished the challenge of shining a spotlight on the issues affecting the youth during my tenure as Youth leader – advocating for youth issues remains a passion of mine to this day. In 2014 I was assigned to work in the rural community of Mkhanyakude. A constituency in the extreme north of the province where the DA had no presence and needed growth. Due to these new duties, I came to the decision to step down as National Youth Leader in order to dedicate my full time to growing such a rural constituency.It was this dedication that resulted in the DA achieving a seat in every municipality in Mkhanyakude, a first for the DA, at the 2016 Local Government Elections. In 2018 I decided to step down from my position as MPL and help the party to grow provincially. I took up a staff position for the DA in KZN, as the party's Provincial Campaign Director (PCD). My task was to help grow the DA's support in KwaZulu-Natal in the 2019 elections, one of the toughest the DA had to face. The party grew its support from 12.76% to 13.9% in KZN, and subsequently increased the number of seats held by the DA in the KZN Legislature from 10 to 11. The highlight of my time in the KwaZulu-Natal legislature has been the number of rewarding campaigns that have brought awareness to issues across Education, Social Development, Public Participation and Petitions, COGTA, and Public Works – leading to my growth as a legislator and political leader. I tell you this because I am immensely proud of the work I have done during my time in the DA. This work stands me in good stead for my next steps. My colleagues in the DA know better than most the difficult and relentless challenges I have faced in the party, in part because so many have played out in the public domain, but also because our party (like any other organisation) is not immune to gossip. I don’t wish to rehash any of these challenges, which are publicly known and have been raised internally on numerous occasions. I have been forthright about instances where the DA has erred in its treatment of its members and the negative culture that is fostered within the organization - my opposition of which formed part of my year-long campaign for DA Leader in 2020. So I leave with a deep sense of compassion for those of you who will remain, and wish you all the best as you forge ahead with the exemplary work you do as individuals to help improve South Africa. To the DA KZN staff. You remain my very best, and I am proud of the work that you do every day. To my compatriots, democrats and colleagues across the political divide and members of the media and public, I would like to extend my sincerest gratitude to all of you for the lashings and love in equal measure that have whipped me into a strong & hardened leader. During my entire career my interactions with colleagues from other parties have been collaborative even when they couldn’t understand my political choices. I want in particular to thank the women of the ANC, IFP and EFF in the provincial legislature. I was the youngest female member and many of you treated me like a daughter and also afforded me the respect of a colleague. I am confident that as much as I shocked you all the time, you learnt as much from me as I did from you and I want to thank you for your kindness and love. As a person who understands the dynamics of being a woman in a political party, I wish you all the fortitude to continue the good fights in your party and to claim your space even more. Ngiyabonga zimbokodo.  To my media colleagues - the importance of your trade in the South African political landscape cannot be overstated, I thank you for your contribution to keeping our democracy robust. I have found you to be amongst the most courageous and deeply feeling people I have ever come across - you are as invested in South Africa’s success as anyone, and committed to shining a light on the issues that matter most. Thank you for the difficult work you do to help bring light to the darkest places, things and times in our country. South Africa needs you now more than ever. Lastly to members of the public. Thank you for the three separate occasions where you’ve done me the honour of electing me to serve this country - a privilege I never took for granted. I hope you know my resignation is not a betrayal of your votes and confidence in me, but rather a chance to renew my energies and find other ways to give back to my community. I am excited about going back onto the ground to work with communities as they uplift themselves in keeping with the South African spirit - I hope to continue to have your support as I do this in a different way. I am not lost to politics, I will be back but it is important for me to utilise my energy, passion and plethora of ideas to uplift communities I currently cannot reach in my current role. I still firmly believe that the current political system and existing political parties are not focused on making South Africa the equitable, just country it needs to be - they are simply not able to foster collaboration, innovation and organise to make a difference. It (and they) are failing to deal with its socio-economic problems and enabling South Africans to advance and access opportunities. I want to work with community leaders across South Africa to harness their potential to realise change. It is therefore time for me to take a break from formal politics to get back on the ground and to help real change makers make our country better. I am excited for what comes next, and am confident that the work ahead will bring me closer to my purpose. I look forward to informing you of how I plan to do this in the near future. Mbali Ntuli.