Party tribalism must fall Tribalism is an instinct. When we encounter those from other groups, our gut tells us to fight them. In a country as diverse as South Africa, this tribalism is exacerbated. Not only does it exist among races and nations, but among the political parties that are meant to be creating a sense of unity within this troubled country. It is natural for political parties to distrust one another. Both are competing for the same thing, and many have competing visions for how the country should be run. But, more often than not, these differences are petty. And the fundamental reason for parties to hate each other is simply that they are different groups. There are more than enough positions of power and governance to go around and the varying visions that parties have are usually more different in aesthetic and detail rather than in substance. At the end of the day, the sincere political party wants the best for South Africa and a position in government to fulfil that goal. South Africa is on the brink of collapse. Some would argue that we have already collapsed. With over a third of South Africans unemployed, crime skyrocketing and law enforcement helpless to defend the innocent, it definitely seems that way. So then, why do political parties continue to play around with petty politics? South Africa is a parliamentary democracy. Technically, we are not governed by any single party, but by a parliament divided between every elected party. But, rather than being ruled by a diverse range of smaller parties that reflect the varied and particular interests of distinct South Africans, we are ruled by a single major ruling party that reflects no values at all, and a hodgepodge of opposition parties that often attack each other more than they attack their true foe. Parties must not be broad The Democratic Alliance (DA) has been and is obsessed with the notion of becoming the majority government in parliament and replacing the African National Congress (ANC). However, with its deteriorating performance in elections, this is becoming more and more of an impossibility. This is not just because the ANC is entrenched into the political psyche of South Africans, but fundamentally, because the DA acts like the only alternative to the ANC, while not truly reflecting the needs of all South African voters. And that’s because it cannot reflect those needs. When a party tries to appeal to everyone, it will appeal to no one. It becomes a plastic and fake club with no substance or sincerity. And that is why the DA, in its current form, is stagnating. Because it has lost track of what it actually believes in – rather trying to appeal to everyone, and instead alienating previously staunch supporters. In business, especially book publishing, the most successful are those who identify a particular niche audience and appeal to this market and its individual needs. They don’t try to appeal to everyone. They focus and specialise and hone their craft to fulfil the needs of their audience. Parties need to do the same. Stop this broad-tent approach to parties. Recognise that the purpose of a political party is to promote a specific vision and set of policies in society. And, if a party does not have a concrete set of policies, they should at least have a specific constituency that they represent in broader government. Coalition of values The ideal is a party that represents its constituency, principles, and policies sincerely and well. But, if this is to be accomplished, it cannot achieve the scope needed to become the majority party. But it shouldn’t. The future of South African politics isn’t and shouldn’t be majority party rule. We have a potentially beautiful political system that encourages diverse thought, vibrant small parties and reasoned debate. Instead, we have petty politics, fear, and alienation. However, we don’t have to have that. Just because parties have different policies and constituencies doesn’t mean that they must be enemies; because much of the time, certain policies are congruent or even reflective of each other. There is nothing stopping a party that wants to secure native language rights in schools from allying with a party that wants to oppose expropriation without compensation. Yet so many parties immediately assume that their interests don’t align. Many times, they do. Smaller parties, and this includes the DA, need to form coalitions of common values that unite behind the essence of their principles rather than the specifics. This means a coalition that stands for freedom, reason, and the rule of law. This also runs counter to the coalitions we’ve seen so far, that have seen parties with incompatible values try to work together in government. That cannot and should not work. Parties with common values need to begin working together to achieve the best for South Africa. This involves dividing up and concentrating on each party’s specific focus and constituency. Stop trying to play games in the other party’s court. Rather, do what each party does best and then unite during and after the election to secure votes and take power away from those parties that continue to break down South Africa from within. Party tribalism, factionalism and an approach of all or nothing will just let South Africa slip further into ruin. Reasonable people and parties will need to work together to achieve anything. No official opposition party will replace the ANC but many parties just well might. Especially if they finally start to reflect the true desires of every South African individual, and not just the soulless mass party manifesto that we have to abide by today. Nicholas Woode-Smith is an author and economic historian from Cape Town. His work includes fiction novels about magical beasts battling in South Africa's underworld to in-depth analyses of politics, economics and the history of this country and the world.