Gauteng Department of Infrastructure Development fails to meet job creation targets, while many residents remain unemployed  9 March 2022 It is an indictment on the unemployed residents of Gauteng that the Department of Infrastructure Development (GDID) in the province continuously fails to meet its Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) objectives. This department is responsible for the implementation of the EPWP programmes in the province. The third quarter report has a target of creating 5252 job opportunities, however only 721 job opportunities were created. This is worrying as programmes like the EPWP play a crucial role in alleviating unemployment not only in the province but in the entire country. Programmes like the EPWP are very important in providing the necessary skills for our unemployed residents, particularly the youth. This helps them to find long-term employment especially given that once our learners leave school, they are not fully equipped to enter the job market. When government departments fail to meet such an important target, it shows that they are not serious about alleviating unemployment in the province which is the economic hub of the country. This trend cannot continue any longer and it is high time that government departments are held to account when they fail to meet important targets like job creation. While the EPWP programme only employs our residents on a short-term basis the skills and knowledge imparted in this programme are invaluable and helps to ensure that our residents are able to either start their own businesses or seek gainful employment in the private sector. On Monday the committee was asked to approve a budget adjustment on EPWP to the amount of almost R60 million. This is an indictment of the department’s ability to create job and opportunities for the most vulnerable and in fact it is testimony of a government who wants to keep its knee on the throat of the poor and dependent on government. The DA is demanding a comprehensive report from the department as well as action steps on how this department will correct the great injustice to our people and will start to meet its set job creation targets. Issued by Nico de Jager, DA Gauteng Spokesperson for Infrastructure Development, 9 March 2022