EFF statement on the appointment of Raymond Zondo as Chief Justice of the ConCourt 10 March 2022 The EFF rejects the short-sighted, factional and uninspired decision by Cyril Ramaphosa, to appoint Acting Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, as the next Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court of South Africa. In what can be described as a reward for treating Ramaphosa with kids gloves at the Commission, despite him presiding over cadre deployment and being tasked with the revival of State-Owned Enterprises as Deputy President, and secondly not implicating Ramaphosa or his son in the State of Capture Commission Reports, Zondo has been appointed as Chief Justice. This is despite arguably having the most delegitimising and compromising interview in-front of the Judicial Service Commission. The appointment of Raymond Zondo, effectively means that the capture of our judiciary by white-monopoly capital and its interests has been completed. Raymond Zondo has over the past few years imprinted himself as a politically divisive force in South African society. He is a member of the judiciary who is prone to descending into the political arena when he is expected to exercise restraint. His arrogance, and reluctance to be truthful about his relationship with Jacob Zuma, led to his refusal to recuse himself when confronted with Zuma as a witness at the State Capture Commission in 2021. It was this spiteful, vindictive and dishonest decision, that led to the greatest security threat in post-democratic South Africa, which saw over 300 lives lost during the July 2021 unrests in Gauteng and Kwa-Zulu Natal It is a categorical fact, that Zondo lied about his relationship with Zuma at the State Capture Commission, and confirmed his dishonesty when he could not recall the details of two meetings he held with him. He embarrassed himself when he pleaded the same ignorance he used to attack witnesses for, at the Judicial Service Commission. It was the very same Zondo, who chose to summon non-entities to the Commission into the capture of the State, while actively avoiding intelligence operatives who could have provided critical information, such as Arthur Fraser. It was Zondo who inexplicably took it upon himself, to hold a press briefing in response to an opinion piece by Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, against the consensus of his own peers, in his permanent quest for popularity and exhibition of his political allegiance. Zondo's aspiration to be a Chief Justice has been fulfilled for his loyal service to Ramaphosa and his allies. His appointment is even more ridiculous, considering that he is only eligible to serve two and a half years at the Constitutional Court, before being forced into retirement. Ramaphosa and Zondo are fulfilling each other's dreams of leading the heights of the arms of the state, without having added any value in their upward trajectory. Billions have been spent on a Commission that has only recommended further investigations, after almost half a decade of being instituted. The most painful part of his appointment, is that it comes at the expense of a qualified, politically independent and credible woman candidate in President of the Supreme Court of Appeals, Mandisa Maya. President Maya, had the most impressive interview, at a forum constituted by duly elected members of Parliament and esteemed members of the legal profession. Ramaphosa has chosen to ignore the recommendation of a capable black woman, because he has a deep hatred for women and places his political desires above the transformation agenda in South Africa. He is a weak spirited man, who suffers from the low self-esteem that results in women being paid less than their male counter-parts in this country. Sitting in the highest office in the land, Ramaphosa represents the fundamental problem of gender inequality in South Africa. It is shameful that he has chosen to side-line a capable, uncompromising black woman, who has on countless occasions shown that she can recuse herself when her presence can undermine the image of the judiciary. It is only President Maya who declared her outright reluctance to have any association with politicians, and her commitment to protecting the integrity of the judiciary whenever there may be a perceived bias in a matter. History must remember Ramaphosa as a lame duck President, who succumbed to pressure from a captured media and the vicious mob of non-governmental organisations, who ran a naked campaign for the appointment of Zondo. The appointment of Raymond Zondo has constituted the Judiciary as a faction of Ramaphosa, and an instrument of the white-ruling class. From today onwards, justice will depend on what political views one holds, and whether they are aligned with the political views of Zondo and his handlers. The judiciary has been stripped of its integrity, independence and objectivity. The highest court in the land, will be turned into an instrument to fight political opponents of the regime. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 10 March 2022