ANC statement on reports of Judicial Commission of Inquiry into allegations of State Capture 4 March 2022 The ANC welcomes the release of the first part, second and third parts of the report of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into Allegations of State Capture and looks forward to the completion of the Commission's work. The ANC has expressed consistent support for the work of the Commission, based on the mandate given by the 54th National Conference in December 2017. We reiterate the position of the ANC as outlined in the 110th anniversary Statement of the National Executive Committee released on 8 January 2022: "The work of the Commission is vital to the national effort to place the era of state capture behind us and ensure that such events are never allowed to happen again. The ANC will support government in effecting the measures required to eliminate conditions and conduct that enable state capture and systemic corruption. As the ANC, we will engage with our structures and members to ensure sufficient understanding of the contents and findings of the Commission. We will put in place mechanisms to process any parts of the Commission report that pertain to the organisation, its deployees or members and to consider how the Commission's recommendations can help to enhance the fundamental renewal and rebuilding of our movement. We call on all South Africans to engage with the Commission's report and to be part of the national effort to put state capture behind us and build an ethical, capable developmental state and a society governed by the values of our democratic Constitution and the rule of law. As part of the renewal process, our movement will intensify efforts to eradicate corruption from society and our organisation. This we were mandated to do at the last National Conference, and it is necessary if we are to meet the objectives of social justice set out in the country's constitution." In pursuance of this position the NEC, at its meeting on 20 — 21 January 2022, established an NEC Task Team consisting of comrades Jeff Radebe (Convener), Joel Netshitenzhe, Thoko Didiza, Ronald Lamola, Naledi Pandor, Lindiwe Maseko to process and make recommendations to the NEC regarding the findings and proposals contained in the Commission' report. The ANC notes and respects the right of individual members of the organisation to exercise their legal and constitutional rights and remedies in respect of the Commission's findings and recommendations against them. This must not detract from the organisation's principled support for the Commission and its work. Issued by ANC, 3 March 2022