Ramaphosa’s Cabinet must go: 5 Reasons for the DA’s Motion of No Confidence in Deputy President David Mabuza  18 March 2022 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite by Zakhele Mbhele MP The DA’s Motion of No Confidence in President Cyril Ramaphosa's cabinet comes because they have collectively failed to carry out their responsibilities. One such individual is Deputy President David Mabuza. We would be remiss if we did not include him among those who have betrayed the trust of the South African people. Mabuza has done nothing for this country during his term as Deputy President. It is almost as if the title "Deputy President" was bestowed on him solely to appease the RET faction in the ANC, with no real responsibilities attached, but at a significant cost to taxpayers. Here are five good reasons the DA believes David Mabuza must be fired: Allegations of corruption – In May 2021, the media reported that a foundation registered to Deputy President David Mabuza received a “strategic donation” of R30-million from General Electric through Eskom in 2016 when he was still the Mpumalanga Premier. Reports reveal that a senior Eskom executive offered the donation to Mabuza’s Foundation in 2016 after General Electric had financed part of Eskom’s Corporate Social Responsibility programme. Missing in action – David Mabuza’s constant leave of absence to seek medical treatment in Russia has often created a leadership void in government, especially in areas of responsibility to which he is assigned. In August 2020, during the height of the Covid-19 pandemic, Mabuza’s absence meant that Parliament could not adequately hold government and the Presidency to account. As Leader of Government Business, he literally became a missing person. Since then, he has missed question sessions in Parliament. Eskom task team has failed to resolve the electricity crisis – As the head of the Eskom task team, which replaced the Eskom war room, Mabuza and his team have remarkably failed to resolve South Africa’s electricity crisis. In fact, since he became Deputy President, he has, together with Ramaphosa, presided over the worst loadshedding periods ever recorded since power blackouts began in 2008. Refusal to condemn rights abuses for the LGBTQI communities in Africa – A few years ago when asked if South Africa will be condemning the ongoing persecution and use of repressive laws against the LGBTQI communities in African countries, Mabuza cowardly remarked that South Africa will “be decent and keep our mouths shut”. Over 30 countries in Africa still have some form of anti-gay legislation. Mpumalanga trail of destruction and corruption – Mabuza left a trail of destruction in Mpumalanga so extensive that some of those misdeeds have followed him to his current role as Deputy President: A conservationist, Fred Daniel, is suing the Mpumalanga Tourism and Parks Agency for R1-billion in damages over what he claims were threats of violence and the use of henchmen to drive him off his conservation area. He alleges that Mabuza was the brains behind this abuse of power when he was still the Mpumalanga Premier. Mr Daniel’s project had the potential to create jobs for local communities in conservation. Allegations of fake land restitution claims in Mpumalanga, when Mabuza was the MEC of Agriculture, have never been cleared. A cloud still hangs over Mabuza’s head over allegations that he may have played a role in alleged fraud that is said to have taken place during 2011 and 2012 in the Mpumalanga Province. The investigation into these allegations has so far led to the arrest of about 11 people, including a current serving Member of Parliament, Bongani Bongo. It is quite evident that David Mabuza has been a hurdle to South Africa's growth path as a leader of government enterprise. According to section 92 (2) of the constitution, members of the Cabinet are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and the performance of their functions. Parliament is therefore duty-bound to hold Mabuza and company accountable – he must go. Issued by Zakhele Mbhele, DA Shadow Minister for the Presidency, 18 March 2022