Another ANC cadre to head SSA 1 March 2022 President Cyril Ramaphosa’s appointment of former Deputy Energy Minister and Ambassador, Thembisile Majola, as Director-General (DG) of the State Security Agency (SSA) is a political ploy straight from the Jacob Zuma-era of ANC politics. By appointing Majola, the President has completely ignored the findings of the High-Level Review Panel on the SSA, which concluded that the “key finding is that there has been a serious politicisation and factionalisation of the intelligence community over the past decade or more, based on factions in the ruling party, resulting in an almost complete disregard for the Constitution, policy, legislation and other prescripts, and turning our civilian intelligence community into a private resource to serve the political and personal interests of particular individuals." In fact, it seems that Majola’s history in serving the ANC while in exile has played a significant role in her appointment to the job. This does not bode well for the turning around of the Agency. It seems with Majola in charge, the SSA would be free to continue engaging in spy games benefitting only the latest President’s bid for re-election at the end of the year. South Africa has a desperate need for intelligence to guide our leaders in making wise decisions, both domestically and internationally. Level-headed, fact-based decision making is something that has been lacking for decades. The report into the violence across KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng following former President Jacob Zuma’s arrest last year, found there were multiple intelligence breakdowns. This cannot be allowed to continue. The National Police Commissioner, General Sithole, has been left to carry the can, while one of the three Ministers involved was promoted, another shifted sideways and the last left in his position. To hear now that the current President has appointed yet another cadre is inexplicable. We believe the DG of SSA should not be a deployed cadre serving certain factions within the ANC. It must rather be a position filled by a career person within the intelligence community with no public political association, who will put the interests of the country and its citizens above the interests of the self-seeking ANC. Our country must come first – not the ANC. Issued by Dianne Kohler Barnard, DA Shadow Minister of State Security, 1 March 2022