Controversial In2IT company again rewarded with another GBN tender  3 March 2022 In2IT Technologies was awarded a tender in 2020 within 24 hours under the guise of Covid-19 procurement which was later retracted. The company has once again received a tender from the Gauteng Provincial Government (GPG) to provide cyber security to the province. It is worrying that In2IT Technologies has once again received a tender from the Gauteng Provincial Government to provide cyber security services to the province. What is even more concerning is that when I tabled questions in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature (GPL) last year regarding the exact scope of work that IN2It technologies would be providing, no concrete answer was provided. Currently there are complications with SITA which is causing a delay in the current roll out of Phase 3 of the Gauteng Broadband Network (GBN) services which is concerning. Furthermore, the Department of e-Government wants to push for a clear Tripartite GBN services on Phase 3 with SITA so it can hold both SITA and service providers to account for the services rendered. In addition to this, the DA also tabled questions about the illegal extension of the previous contract for the GSOC and we have still not received the forensic report into this matter. Since 2014, Premier David Makhura has been pushing for all our residents in Gauteng to have access to Wi-Fi so that they are able to access government services online. Whilst it is critical that government has a proper cyber security system in place and that all residents have access to internet services that they can access at various government facilities, the department must get to a point where it is no longer reliant on SITA to provide this service but are able to deliver this themselves. This week I have tabled questions in the GPL regarding the tender that was awarded to In2IT Technologies for the Gauteng Security Operations Centre (GSOC) to ascertain exactly how this tender was awarded and if there were any other service providers that were able to provide the same service. The DA will continue to push for proper procurement and supply chain management processes to be followed in all the tenders that are awarded by GPG to ensure that they adhere to the open tender system and that all suppliers are given an equal opportunity to do business with government. Our residents deserve only the best services from government and the DA will continue to ensure that our taxpayers receive value for money when tenders are awarded that are supposed to improve service delivery to our people. Issued by Adriana Randall, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Finance and e-Government, 3 March 2022