ATM MONC lapses from the agenda of the House 31 March 2022 The motion of no confidence in the President by the African Transformation Movement (ATM) has lapsed from the parliamentary programme, and the party has been advised to submit afresh when it is ready to do so. The Speaker’s announcement at the National Assembly programme committee this morning follows the failure of the ATM to move the motion during the scheduled debate of no confidence in the President that took place during a sitting of the NA yesterday. The NA Rules and procedures require that a member proposing a scheduled motion must move it in the Assembly for debate. Should the member choose not to move the scheduled motion, it then lapses from the parliamentary programme. The ATM, though present in the House, failed to move the motion yesterday. The ATM’s failure to move its motion in the House was then referred to the Programme Committee for guidance and decision. The ATM’s motion was scheduled for 30 March, using an open ballot voting process. However, the ATM had requested a closed vote on the motion, which the Speaker declined. The ATM took the Speaker to court on an urgent basis, but the case was struck off the roll for the lack of urgency on Monday. The Programme Committee also discussed the manual rollcall voting procedure, which was used for the first time yesterday during the DA’s motion of no confidence in the cabinet, excluding the President. The question of no confidence was put to the House and the Secretary then called each Member in turn, who had to reply either “yes”, “no” or "abstain" to the question. According to the Rules on virtual sittings, Members are entitled to cast their votes either electronically, by voice or by having their votes recorded by their respective Whips. All agreed that the procedure, which was used yesterday for the first time, caused some teething problems, even though the rules allowed for it. A new electronic voting system will be introduced soon to provide for both secret or open voting procedures in hybrid sittings of the National Assembly. Furthermore, the committee agreed to hold mini plenaries virtually, as there are insufficient venues for physical mini-plenary sittings. Members of Parliament will go on constituency and leave from 4 April until April 18, 2022. Issued by Moloto Mothapo, Media Officer, Parliament, 31 March 2022