AfriForum demands clarity from SARS regarding ANC’s R102 million unpaid tax debt 29 March 2022 The civil rights organisation AfriForum yesterday submitted a PAIA application to the South African Revenue Service (SARS) in which they request among others the tax records and returns of the ANC from 1994 till now. The organisation also asks whether the ANC receives preferential treatment in this regard. This follows reports that SARS is demanding a payment of R102 million from the ANC for unpaid taxes. In December 2021, the Gauteng High Court issued a civil judgment instructing the sheriff to attach assets to the value of approximately R102 million in 10 days. The ANC employs 346 staff members at Luthuli House, but has not paid employee tax, UIF or the skills development levy, although it deducted these from staff for years. With its PAIA application, AfriForum has requested the following: 1. The tax records and returns for the ANC from the year 1994 to today. 2. The full amount in arrears, if any, which is due and payable by the ANC to SARS. 3. An indication of the steps taken by SARS to collect this outstanding amount from the ANC. 4. If SARS has not yet taken formal steps, to provide reasons for the failure to do so. 5. Provide an indication of whether the ANC enjoys preferential treatment in tax collection matters, and if so, what the legal and rational basis for such treatment is. In September 2021 AfriForum sent a letter to Edward Kieswetter, Commissioner of SARS, requesting details regarding the R102 million owed to SARS by the ANC. No answer was received. Therefore, AfriForum is taking the next legal step. “Even though the ANC owes over R102 million in taxes, they still lecture citizens on why their tax money must fund a R50 million donation to Cuba,” says Ernst van Zyl, Campaign Officer for Strategy and Content at AfriForum. “The walls are closing in on the ANC. In March AfriForum was able to halt the ANC’s donation to Cuba, and now we will fight to provide the public with clarity regarding this matter,” Van Zyl concludes. Issued by Chanté Kelder, Media Relations Officer, AfriForum, 29 March 2022