DA will fight horrific Censorship Act  3 March 2022 The DA rejects President Cyril Ramaphosa’s signing of the Films and Publications Amendment Act. Not only is this a dark day for our hard won freedom of speech, but due to problems with the Government Printing Works (GPW), South Africans did not know this Act had been proclaimed until the day it became law. The President’s surreptitious proclamation of the Act indicates that the ANC government hoped this horrific piece of legislation would go unnoticed. The DA has asked the problems with the GPW be solved as a matter of urgency, and because our call was not adhered to, the Act has caught the country by surprise. The DA is vehemently opposed to this Act, and it seemed that the ANC government conceded it has problematic aspects. In 2020, the then Minister of Communications and Digital Technologies, Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, committed in a parliamentary portfolio committee meeting to ensuring that the final version of so-called ‘internet censorship’ regulations will not infringe on the constitutional right to freedom of expression. Another empty ANC promise. Our right to freedom of expression must be relentlessly shielded from the State’s perpetual undemocratic quest to suffocate and criminalise its citizens’ expressions. Trying to police and censor citizens, especially online, shows a government completely blinded by their obsession and out of touch with the reality of the situation. The fundamental risk posed by this unfortunate piece of legislation is that it tightens the State’s regulatory grip on what ordinary citizens can say and share online and introduces a needless bureaucratic process for commercial content producers to comply with, along with ruthless penalties should they fail to comply. It’s a legal instrument of mass suffocation of all digital freelancers and independent generators of online content who will now be forced to submit to the authority of the Film and Publication Board (FPB) for compliance with the tedious provisions set out. The DA believes that the existing laws regulating internet consumption and distribution of information are sufficient to deal with instances of hate speech, incitement of violence, or homophobic expressions. There is simply no need for the enactment of this legislation. The DA will fight this vicious assault on our digital freedom with everything at our disposal. And if needs be, we will go to court to challenge it. Meanwhile, we need every South African who values freedom of speech to join us in defeating this. Issued by Solly Malatsi, DA Shadow Minister of Communications, 3 March 2022