EFF condemns inhumane conditions at Chris Hani Baragwanath hospital 10 March 2022 The EFF condemns the cruel and inhumane conditions that patients are subjected to at the Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital in Johannesburg, Gauteng. A hospital notorious for its poor infrastructure and services has reached a chilling low, with reports that there are no food supplies for patients. This failure by the Department of health is insensitive, neglectful and barbaric. Chris Hani Baragwanath services thousands of black, poor and dejected South Africans, who cannot afford private healthcare. This means that victims of violent crime, disease and chronic illnesses, are being starved by a hospital in this country. The fact that a public hospital cannot provide food for poor and indigent patients, is a reflection of the complete collapse of the public health sector and the consequences of the continued austerity measures put in place by government. It must be condemned in the strongest terms, and is an indication that the office of the Minister of Health is vacant. The EFF salutes the doctors and nurses who have sacrificed their own money, to provide necessary nutrition to ailing patients who have been failed by their government. Far too often, the medical personnel in public health care facilities in South Africa are chastised and ridiculed, without a greater appreciation of the horrible and underfunded environment they have to operate in. Their intervention in what is a humanitarian crisis and a violation of the basic rights of needy and vulnerable patients, is heroic and admirable. The EFF calls for an immediate intervention by the Department of Health in the torture that patients at Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital are being subjected to. There must be an immediate allocation of funds to remedy the crisis, because the interventions of doctors and nurses, who are purchasing food for patients is not sufficient. Patients require valuable nutrition in order for their health needs to be treated effectively, and ad-hoc interventions of meals purchased from vendors are not adequate to service the balanced diet a hospitalised individual requires. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 10 March 2022