EFF condemns Pravin Gordan and Andre de Ruyter for failing to attend SCOPA meeting 1 March 2022 The EFF condemns the blatant arrogance of Minister of Public Enterprises Pravin Gordhan and Eskom CEO Andre De Ruyter, who failed to attend a critical meeting of the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. In an exhibition of their combined ethnic-chauvinism, the Indian and white supremacists who are crippling our national assets undermined the oversight role of Parliament, by not attending a SCOPA meeting where they were meant to account on deviations and expansions of contracts by Eskom. By deviations, this means requests to deviate from normal procurement processes. Eskom has about 11 deviation requests for quarter 1 and 2 of the 2021/22 financial year. The entity made 28 expansion requests during the same period. An expansion basically means that an entity can expand and extend existing contracts rather than request new bids from potential suppliers to perform the work. Only three of the requested deviations, and four expansions were not approved, and the rest, costing billions of rands, were approved, and others approved conditionally. This means that Eskom could do what it wanted to do, and appoint contractors they wanted without following normal procurement procedures, and that they could expand contracts of those they are close with, without opening up the space for new entrants to the industry Through this method, Eskom is able to maintain the dominance of white contractors in that entity. Gordhan and De Ruyter ran away from accounting for these procurement blunders, which easily amount to fraud. Gordhan's disregard for accountability was so brazen, that he had the audacity to send an apology minutes before the meeting began, citing a meaningless commitment to one of Ramaphosa's consultations with his handlers in the private sector. The EFF has long warned that the collapse of the State-Owned Enterprises is a deliberate exercise, in order to auction these entities off to domestic and foreign capital interests. The scant regard these two have over outlining the contractual obligations and needs at Eskom, proves this fact. South Africa is in an energy crisis, and instead of accounting to a democratically elected Parliament, De Ruyter has chosen to travel the world with undeserved money he gets as a CEO of a failing entity. The EFF is going to demand both Gordhan and De Ruyter come back to SCOPA to account for their role in the destruction of Eskom. Going forward, the pair must be subpoenaed to appear before SCOPA because they have shown that they must be forced to respect democratic institutions. Further to this, we will demand a racial breakdown of the contractors whose contracts were expanded, and those who got contracts through deviation from normal procurement processes. As long as two supremacists who suffer from high-levels of disrespect for Africans preside over our State-Owned Entities, unemployment will continue to spiral out of control and the development of South Africa will go backwards. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 2 March 2022