EFF statement on adjusted lockdown regulations and public process towards the end of the State of National Disaster 22 March 2022 The EFF has noted the frivolous and pointless adjustments made by Cyril Ramaphosa to the lockdown regulations and his faux public participatory process, towards the ending of the State of Disaster. In yet another exhibition of his unnecessary desire to appear on television, Ramaphosa announced meaningless adjustments to a State of Disaster that has long lost rationality, scientific basis and authority over our people. Society in general has long moved in with its affairs, and does not observe his ego-brushing pronouncements of non-existent power over the number of people who can gather anywhere and at any time. His anti-African restrictions on funerals, has been ignored as our people mourn freely before and after they bury their loved ones in whichever way they see fit. The restriction on gatherings will be observed by him and his friends, not by the EFF and certainly not by the people of South Africa. It also a lie that healthcare infrastructure was improved during the pandemic. In fact we lost a hospital in Charlotte Maxeke, and hospitals such as Baragwanath are retrenching staff. There remains a shortage of hospital staff in the public sector, with 10 000 shortage of doctors and 1300 shortage of 1300 nurses. His hallmark of lying is continuing, and it is disguised with a pretence of power over our lives Whether Ramaphosa ends the State of Disaster or not has become moot, and the only material concern South Africans should have is on the continued closure of stadiums. It is only logical that the closure of stadiums serves the commercial interests of broadcasting giant Multi-Choice, which has undoubtedly seen increased revenue in its sporting packages due to the closure of stadiums. Hawkers, ticket salespersons, ground staff and the entire economy in the sprouting fraternity is suffering, because Ramaphosa is on a warpath to destroy the economy so as to allow for the private sector and imperialists to run our affairs. The EFF reiterates the call for all fans and ordinary people to demand for full access to stadiums. All that has become clear from Ramaphosa's address and relevant government deliberations, is that he is desperate to hold onto the power the COVID­19 pandemic afforded him, by retaining some features of the lockdown permanently on legislation. His shallow attempts to entrench himself as somewhat of a dictator must be rejected, and this must be through a complete disregard for his nonsensical laws which are not a product of broader consultation with democratic institutions. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 24 March 2022