Unrevised Hansard, National Assembly, Tuesday, 15 March 2022 THE IMPACT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION’S INVASION OF UKRAINE ON THE SOUTH AFRICAN ECONOMY The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Deputy Speaker and hon members, the world is facing its biggest threat of war in over 80 years. A tyrannical aggressor with a finger on the nuclear button has invaded a far less powerful neighbour and is shelling civilian targets as we speak. Over two million Ukrainians have become overnight refugees as their homes and hospitals have been bombed to rubble. President Vladimir Putin is acting with the impunity of a despot with nothing to lose. Let us be very clear; there is no moral ambiguity here. Regardless of the political history of the region or decades of tension between East and West, Russia has committed an unjustifiable act of war. Every world leader with a moral conscience has condemned it and called on Russia to withdraw, but not South Africa’s President Ramaphosa. Under a shameful veneer of neutrality, the ANC government has effectively pledged its tacit support for Putin’s imperial march to restore his lost empire. And I’m not only talking about the shameful abstention in the UN vote. When ANC Ministers attend a cocktail function glorifying the might of the Russian army on the very day of the invasion, you don’t have to read between the lines. When a lone call from the Department of International Relations and Co-operation, for Russia to withdraw its troops is hastily retracted and the Minister admonished, you don’t have to read between the lines. And when our President calls Putin in the middle of his invasion, pledging to strengthen bilateral support for him, while the rest of the world isolates him, you don’t have to read between the lines. To the astonishment of the world, the very same ANC that relied on global solidarity to fight oppression has now openly sided with the oppressor. It has picked the wrong side of history and it has dragged 60 million South Africans along with it. And why? Is it because Russia once supported South Africa’s liberation struggle? But, that wasn’t Russia. It was the Soviet Union, and that solidarity included Ukraine, the very country being attacked. That was also a long time ago, and at what stage does Russia’s recent actions cancel out that historical goodwill? Is it then because it’s in our country’s economic interests? I can show you it’s not that either. Russia is only our 38th largest trading partner, accounting for around half a per cent of our exports and imports. That’s less than 1,4% of our trade with North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, Nato, countries, and yet we shun our own economic partners in favour of a global pariah. But if it’s not in South Africa’s interests, then in whose interests is it? And to answer that, you only need to look at Russia’s expansion into Africa through its so-called elite capture, where pliable leaders are ensnared in long-term patronage schemes. Fifteen African countries currently have Russian-financed nuclear deals and many more are locked into Russian security contracts. Also consider that a businessman close to Putin tried to run a disinformation campaign in the 2019 election to favour the ANC and that the ANC’s largest donor last year was a Putin-backed oligarch. When you connect these dots, the full picture of why the ANC supports Russia starts to emerge. Now, there are some who say that this is not our war to become involved in but that is simply not true. We may be 9 000 kilometres away, but we will soon feel its effects in every single aspect of South African life. When the oil price skyrockets through to R30 to R40 as has been predicted, this will be our war too. When diesel becomes so expensive that Eskom can no longer burn its turbines, and when the lights go out they stay out, this will be our war too. When the spiralling cost of importing and transporting food is passed on to consumers who already struggle to make ends meet and feed their families, and we see a large increase in malnutrition, this will be our war too. And, when all of this food, insecurity and inflation results in a breakdown of law and order that will make last year’s July riots look like child’s play, this will be our war too. We are already involved and there is no such thing as a neutral position. As the late Archbishop Desmond Tutu famously said: “If you are neutral in situations of injustice, you have chosen the side of the oppressor.” Countries that choose the wrong side of history will live with this tag for generations to come. It shouldn’t be the hard thing to do; to put country ahead of party and to do the right thing. The ANC does not speak for South Africa on this and it certainly does not speak for the DA. [Applause.] We condemn Russia’s illegal invasion in the strongest terms and we stand firmly with the people of Ukraine. I urge President Ramaphosa to rethink the position of his government. Think of the plight of Ukraine, think of South Africa’s place in the world and think about what this war is going to mean for all of us as South Africans. Choose peace; condemn Russia. Thank you. The DEPUTY MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION (Ms K C Mashego-Dlamini): Thank you very much, hon Deputy Speaker. Greetings to our Chief Whip, Ministers present here and hon members. After the democratic elections in 1994, South Africa ceased to be the pariah of the world. It regained its rightful place in Africa, in the UN and in the family of nations. We emerged as a democratic country into a fundamentally transformed world. The development of South Africa’s postapartheid foreign policy is guided by seven principles, which are: Firstly, a belief in human rights which extends beyond the political, embracing economic, social and environmental issues; Secondly, a belief that just and lasting solutions to the problems of humankind can only come through the promotion of democracy, worldwide; Thirdly, a belief that justice and international law should guide the relations between nations; Fourthly, a belief that international peace is the goal to which all nations should strive. Where this breaks down, internationally-agreed peaceful mechanisms to solve conflicts should be resorted to; Fifthly, a belief that our foreign policy should reflect the interests of the continent of Africa; Sixthly, a belief that South Africa's economic development depends on growing regional and international economic co-operation in an independent world; and Lastly, a belief that our foreign relations must mirror our deep commitment to the consolidation of a democratic South Africa. South Africa’s approach on the Russia-Ukraine matter has been based on the following key principles, which in turn are based on the foreign policy: Firstly, expressing deep concern at the violation of the UN Charter and international law, the loss of life, the humanitarian impact and the forced displacement of people as a result of the war in Ukraine; Secondly, recognising that armed conflict will no doubt result in human suffering and destruction, the effects of which will not only affect Ukraine but also reverberate across the world. No country is immune to the effects of this conflict. As the UN Secretary-General has indicated, the conflict will have a huge impact on the global economy at the moment when we are emerging from the COVID pandemic and so many developing countries absolutely need to have space for recovery; Thirdly, South Africa emphasises respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states. On 9 September 2021, BRICS leaders expressed concern at the continuing conflicts and violence in different parts of the world; and Fourthly, BRICS leaders reaffirmed their commitment to the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of states, and reiterated that all conflicts must be resolved by peaceful means and through political and diplomatic efforts, in line with international Law, which is the UN Charter. As a nation birthed through negotiation, South Africa is always appreciative of the potential that dialogue has in averting a crisis and de-escalating conflict. In line with our strong commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflict, South Africa urges all parties to devote increased efforts to diplomacy and to find a solution that will help avert further escalation. The door of diplomacy should never be closed, even as conflict has broken out. South Africa urges all parties to approach the situation in a spirit of compromise, with all sides respecting international law. The peaceful resolution of the matter can be achieved by all parties if diplomatic efforts ... Mr B A RADEBE: Deputy Speaker! Deputy Speaker! Afrikaans: Die ADJUNKSPEAKER: Agb lede, julle is buite orde. Julle kan nie so tekere gaan nie. Nee man! English: No, can you not do that please. You are interrupting the speaker. It is irresponsible and it’s not okay. Please finish your remarks, Madam. The DEPUTY MINISTER OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND CO-OPERATION (Ms K C Mashego-Dlamini): South Africa urges all parties to approach the situation in a spirit of compromise, with all sides respecting international law. The peaceful resolution of the matter can be achieved by all parties if diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the concerns raised and expressed by Russia, resume. Currently, it is critical for all parties to uphold and protect human rights and abide by their obligations in terms of international law and international humanitarian law. South Africa continues to support and encourage regional initiatives such as the Minsk agreements and we welcome the work of the Normandy Format, the Trilateral Contact Group and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe. South Africa supports the involvement of the Good Offices of the UN Secretary-General as it could also make a positive contribution in finding a lasting solution to this conflict. In the search for peace, South Africa supports the resolution process of inclusive talks led by the UN Security Council to address all the issues of concern to any of the parties. Noting that international action must create an environment conducive for diplomacy, dialogue and mediation, greater attention must be paid to bringing the sides closer to dialogue and not take them further apart. The international community should support engagement between the parties in a spirit of compromise, while de-escalating tensions, committing them to the cessation of hostilities and building trust and confidence. Ladies and gentlemen and Members of Parliament, as the government of South Africa we urge all South Africans not to take sides in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine as this could go against our principles. In addition, South Africa has good bilateral relations with both countries. The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon members? [Interjections.] Hon member, you are making a noise there! You are out of order! Yes, I’m pointing at you! You are disruptive, sir, and you have been repeating it. It is out of order! You want your members to be listened to, okay? So, please behave man. Just let your members speak because you want them to be listened to. You too. Otherwise ... That’s the best way to improve your argument, not by screaming. It’s no argument ... screaming. Go ahead, hon Bergman, and appeal to them to listen to you. [Laughter.] Mr D BERGMAN: Hon Deputy Speaker, this did not start last month. I’ve been pushing the Department of International Relations and Co-operation, DIRCO, and the Ministers before to take an active and productive opportunity in using their proximity to President Putin to try and persuade him, first, from occupying the Crimean Peninsula; then, secondly, from building up military on the borders of Ukraine and from handing out passports to create instability and friction as per the Georgian script a decade ago. I was not asking South Africa to take sides; I was rather tending them to clean their tarnished and embarrassing world image that has not shone since the Madiba magic days. Having witnessed the ANC executive catch the ball, pass it, fumble it and then throw it off-sides and then bench their Minister who spoke sense; DIRCO, the one stable ship of foreign embarrassments, then ran on the field to join government, scoring an own goal at the United Nations, UN, General Assembly, took away our last ounce of credibility as defenders of any form of human rights with our hypocritical but damagingly loyal excuse for a policy. A week before the Russian invasion, whilst no one believed Russia would unnecessarily invade Ukraine, embassies still proactively made evacuation plans for their citizens. Some of these included pre-evacuation, emergency travel documents and emergency contacts. Contrast this to our embassy that abandoned passports and visa applications when taking themselves to safety. A group of us who had worked together under different DIRCO leadership in repatriating South Africans back during covid got together to immediately assist in the evacuation of around 200 South Africans, mainly students, stranded in the war-torn areas of Ukraine. As the names were being put on the group, the ambassador put politics ahead of South Africans. Threatening the group that ‘if my name was not removed’, he would remove himself. He then went on to treat the group admin volunteers like his secretaries and only took info but withheld crucial information that could assist. Furthermore, DIRCO WhatsApps would tell people to stay put, they would say that there is no war, that it is a military operation and that they cannot get emergency travel documents because these are only issued in exceptional circumstances. Thankfully the volunteers, headed by Lorraine Blauw and Kim Kur, continued to pull people over the borders thanks to the embassies, foreign embassies and committed DIRCO heroes, and South Africans being South Africans. DIRCO boasts about their flights but somehow did not know that people could fly testing positive once recovered from COVID-19. So, they still ended up having to assist there too and with the ones that DIRCO still refer to them. The situation could be helped immediately if stranded Ukrainians with families in South Africa had a visa-free rite of passage for at least 6 months, reviewed annually and if we instructed our embassies in surrounding countries to assist our citizens with emergency travel documents to travel home. Come on, Ministers, save face. Put your people first and put principle above loyalty. This is war. It does affect South Africa and your voice must protect our pockets. Thank you. [Applause.] Mr N F SHIVAMBU: Deputy Speaker, we state here on behalf of the anti-imperialist and anti-colonial economic emancipation movement that there is absolutely nothing wrong with the Russian Federation preventing the military expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO, which is trying to expand its presence towards the borders of the Russian Federation. Particularly because NATO is historically known for starting and engaging in neo-colonial and imperialist wars that are aimed at illegally removing ... [sound cut off.] ... enforcement of a so-called no flying zone in Libya, led to the killing of Brother Leader Muammar Gaddafi ... and was aimed at pillaging and stealing the gold ... [sound overlapped.] ... currency reserve from the African continent. We’ll never forgive NATO for the killing of ... The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Shivambu, maybe you want to switch off your video to improve bandwidth and so on. Do that, your reception is pretty bad. Please go ahead. Hon members, your job today is to listen, please. This is your debate. Mr N F SHIVAMBU: We will never forgive NATO for the killing of Brother Leader Muammar Gaddafi and we’ll never forget that this war-alliance of NATO destroyed Libya, which was one of the very few economically sovereign economies in the African continent. Now, South Africa’s relationship with the Russian Federation is rooted in through bonds of liberatory brotherhood. At the core of the Soviet Union was the Russian Federation and anyone who argues otherwise is being dishonest. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, USSR, and Russia in particular, dedicated military, political and ideological resources in the struggle against colonialism and apartheid in South Africa. After the Sharpeville Massacre on the 21st of March 1960 the Soviet Union was among the first to cut all diplomatic relations with apartheid South Africa. It was essentially ... [sound cut off.] ... the Soviet Union working with the Cuban and Vietnam forces that provided military ... [sound cut off.] ... assistance in the battle of ... apartheid criminals ... and the transition in South Africa. The Soviet Union and the Russian Federation are not peace-time friends of South Africa but true friends who must never be abandoned irrespective of imperialist-sponsored master narratives about the military operations in Ukraine, which are essentially and emphatically aimed at preventing imperialist military expansion in Eastern Europe. South Africa as a member of the Brazil, Russian, India, China and South Africa, Brics, block of emerging economies which essentially gives South Africa’s economy access to a market of more than three billion people in the world and to more than 32% of the world economy. Our country must never distance itself from Brics in favour of the erstwhile colonial and neo-colonial masters whose interests are ruthless, excrutish ... for our natural resources. South Africa must not cut its economic relations with the Russian Federation and must instead deepen, broaden and strengthen our economic, social and political relations with the Russian Federation; and of course, with all Bric countries. The Russian Federation, like all Bric countries of Brazil, China and India, have no colonial and no neo-colonial aspirations but are instead committed to global peace stability and collective prosperity. In the immediate, the SA Health Products Regulatory Authority, SAHPRA, must ... [sound cut-off.] ... authorize Sputnik V vaccines and all other relationships must be strengthened so that we have access to Sputnik V vaccines here in South Africa. And all parts of the progressive world must create the West’s isolation of Russia as an opportunity to transcend to a new world as an European imperialism and neo-colonialism. In terms of the background, Chairperson, is that the outcomes of the second world war was, one, the formation of the United Nations but the colonial masters ... [sound cut-off.] ... like the United States, US, and the United Kingdom, UK, started a war alliance. NATO is the war alliance which is trying to expand its military bases towards Eastern Europe. The United States of America, USA, has currently more than ... [sound overlapped.] ... 79 of those are in the African continent including ... [sound cut-off] ... in Botswana, where we have the African Command Centre. So, there is absolutely nothing wrong with the military operations that are taking place in Ukraine to prevent the expansion of NATO because we know of their sins and what they have done to destroy many parts of the world of overthrowing governments. We stand as the EFF to reaffirm that the relationship that has been built through blood and common purpose against colonialism and apartheid must be strengthened through properly defined and deepened economic relationships. We must never fall to victim ... [sound overlapped.] ... alliance as a peaceful alliance and any other person or any other national territory as a criminal alliance. We stand as the EFF to reaffirm that our relationship with Russia must never be discontinued. We should, on the contrary, strengthen that relationship because it is based in common prosperity and anti-imperialism. Thank you very much. [Applause.] Mr M HLENGWA: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, the world finds itself yet again on the brink of economic collapse, hot on the heels of the two-year-long COVID-19 crisis, which has altered the course of humanity. The socio-economic and socio-political climate is fragile, in need of recovery and newness. Add to this now, the latest international crisis, in the form of an unequivocally unnecessary invasion of Ukraine by Russia. It is fast-escalating into an international humanitarian crisis, on top of what the international community is already confronted with in various parts of the world, as we grapple with COVID-19 and its after-effects; notwithstanding ongoing wars, global terror, and displacement of people. Therefore, at the outset we must call out Russia on its wrongness. The invasion of Ukraine and the current war is wrong and in total violation of every international statute and protocol in existence or imaginable. The basics are this: Ukraine is a sovereign state in the international community of nations. It has a right to determine its own national interest and Russia has no right in law or in principle to impose itself on Ukraine nor to determine an agenda for Ukraine. Oppression, dictatorship and repression must be rejected wherever they manifest themselves in the world. To be pro-Ukraine does not presuppose that one is anti-Russia nor should being pro-Russia make one anti-Ukraine. Furthermore, those who are friends of Russia are dishonest friends and unworthy of the name if they fail to be frank and call Russia to order and denounce its war-centric attitude towards Ukraine. The hallmark of friendship is honesty and the ability to tell our friends when they are wrong. Thus the South African government has failed dismally in its attempt to be a voice of reason, freedom and democracy when it chooses to be half-pregnant, being neither fish nor fowl on this glaring violation of human rights and international protocols. Neutrality in a war advances the agenda of the aggressor; in this case Russia. Russia’s own reservations about NATO notwithstanding, it must understand that you don’t start a war to prevent a war. Therefore, we must reject the invasion and the war, and Russia must pull out of Ukraine. The United Nations must appoint a Special Envoy as matter of urgency to mediate the situation, provided Russia pulls out of Ukraine and defense-military and humanitarian assistance must be afforded to Ukraine. Europe must itself be called out for its racism in how it has handled the refugee crisis flowing out of Ukraine. The blatant discrimination towards African and black nationals has called into serious question the bona fides of the human rights assistance and humanitarian assistance being meted out. Racism must be rejected, especially in a war. If we are committed to justice and democracy, then we must reject this irrational, erratic and egotistic Putin-paranoia-driven war as we equally reject the One-China policy, which oppresses the Taiwanese and Tibetan people and we must hold true to the principle of a two-state solution in the Israeli-Palestine conflict and reject any human rights violations on both sides. Hon Deputy Speaker, we must be unwavering in our efforts towards global peace and accept that peace is an act of humanity, not ideology. The loss of life anywhere is a loss for humanity, not ideology. Any ideological or political discourse that thrives on and results in war, loss of life and violence, must be rejected; and every effort made to bring about peace. The international community must uphold the sovereignty of each state to determine its own suffrage. In conclusion, the international community does not need another war or a distraction. We need a global effort towards economic recovery, development and growth and to push back on the frontiers of global poverty, inequality and unemployment. The Putin madness is an unnecessary [Time expired.] distraction from this noble international obligation and therefore, this war must be rejected in the strongest possible terms and contempt it deserves. I thank you. Dr P J GROENEWALD: Deputy Speaker, there must be no doubt that each and every person in South Africa, is affected by the war in Ukraine. The subject for discussing this day, is what is an economic influence and effect in South Africa in terms of the war in the Ukraine. And why do I say that each and every person is affected by that? It is because you have to eat to live. If you go and look what the statistics reveal, we will find and see that 30% of the wheat consumption in South Africa is imported from the Ukraine. And, that is a projection ‑ that since 24 January – if you project it over a year to year, wheat prices will increase with 27%. White maize will increase with 20%, yellow maize with 21%. That is then no wonder that certain bakeries, already announced that there will a sharp increase in the price of bread – because of the war in the Ukraine. And, to get to a situation where you think that it doesn’t influence you as a citizen or as a person in South Africa because is far away, then you are misleading yourself. Let me even talk about the influence of fuel prices, the agricultural sector, fertilizers. So, in the next season where farmers are preparing for wheat to plant, they are going to pay a dear price because of this war in Ukraine. And the hon Deputy Speaker, I want to say to the ANC, that if you think that just because of the support in your struggle days, that you have to look in favour of your friend, I want to say to you, you are failing the people of South Africa. A true friend will appreciate sharp criticism, if they deserve it. And, I think the ANC must ask itself, the fact that they don’t want to condemn in strong terms the war in Ukraine. The fact the they did not support the resolution in the United Nations ‑ and how does Russia see you? Do they see you as a friend or as a useful idiot? That is the fact. Afrikaans: Ek wil dit baie duidelik stel. Daar moet geen onduidelikheid wees nie. As ’n land sy tenks en troepe in ’n ander land stuur, dan is jy die aggressor. Dit maak nie saak watse argumente jy wil gebruik om te sê dat jy dit nie gedoen het nie. Daar is geen reverdiging nie. Daarom sê die VF Plus dat die inval van Rusland in die Oekraïne moet ten sterkste veroordeel word. English: And I said it before, the real victims of war are the women and the children and we see that. I thank you. Ms J TSHABALALA: Deputy Speaker, point of order: The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, what’s the point of order? Ms J TSHABALALA: Yes, hon Deputy Speaker, I wanted to raise a point of order to the member on the podium – because he is misleading the House. He says that only Ukraine supply 70% of wheat is not true ... The DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon member ... Ms J TSHABALALA: ... is both Russia and Ukraine, he must not mislead the House, it’s important. The DEPUTY SPEAKER: ... hon member, that’s not a point of order that’s a debating point. Mr K R J MESHOE: Deputy Speaker, the ACDP, was one of the first parties that call on Russia to withdraw their forces from Ukraine, so that dialogue, negotiations and diplomacy can take place, free from violence. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine we are debating today, is very unfortunate and should not have happened. The stubbornness of political leaders, who negotiate in bad faith has resulted in what potentially might descend into third world war. Given that Russia has reportedly requested military and technically assistance from China, while the United States, US on the other hand has warned China of serious consequences if she gives assistance to Russia. This is a clear indication that the Russia‑Ukraine conflict is not an easy matter that can be resolved by just condemning one side against the other. King Solomon once said: The first one want to plead his case seems right, until another comes and cross examines him. This simple means that we must listen to both side of the story in any conflict before we pass judgement which will be skewed and might even exonerate the guilty party. The ACDP does not agree with President Ramaphosa ’s approach to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine. According media reports, President Ramaphosa has discussed the conflict with Russian President, Vladimir Putin but has not discussed the same conflict with Ukrainian President, Volodymyr Zelenskyy. The ACDP would like to know why President Ramaphosa is not calling President Zelenskyy, just as he called President Putin? You should prevail on both leaders, to allow mediation process to end this conflict, that is affecting South Africa’s economy directly. What affects Ukraine, affects Europe, Africa and the rest of the world. The economies of emerging markets like South Africa are badly hit hard, rolling black outs, the legacy of COVID‑19 lockdowns, corruption and poor service delivery have put South Africa in a worse financial position than the one we faced during the global meltdown of 2008. Invested chief economist is also concerned and is saying that the war between Russia and Ukraine, coupled with continued load shedding and the slow implementation of structural reforms could cost South Africa’s economic growth 0,2% in this year. Hon members, the ACDP repeats its call on Russia and Ukraine, to allow peaceful mediation to take place, because we are affected negatively by this war. We want peace and not war and I call on our members to allow both sides and encourage both sides to meet and negotiate rather than stand on grandstand and condemn one against the other. Thank you. [Time expired.] Mr B H HOLOMISA: Hon Deputy Speaker and hon members, the tension between the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, NATO, countries and Russia is well documented. What the recent invasion of Ukraine has exposed, is that the United Nations has become a mere talk shop and is a toothless body with no leadership. Nothing stopped the UN leadership to have met with two parties to resolve the situation before it escalated to war. The UN has failed the Ukrainian people and the Russians who are not in favour of this invasion. Many countries struggle with the challenge of refugees. And, even here in South Africa, we find displaced Africans, from war ravaged countries. None of these countries find real support from the UN, in terms of housing millions of refugees, never mind feeding them. South Africa and other member states pump membership monies into the UN, but it seems to be funding the bureaucrats in New York and that money does not benefit the member states in other ways. Finally, South Africa is a shining example of negotiating to resolve conflict and we have replicated that receipt for other conflict scenarios. The UN could learn a few tricks from our example. However, use of force in order to achieve a political objective, must be condemned in the strongest terms. Finally, we need to agree as South Africans on what is our national interest out there. Otherwise, we will be victims of these superpowers. IsiXhosa: Ayikho kaloku into yokuba ngoku siza kuba ngoo... English: ...Father Christmas. IsiXhosa: Xa kukho ungquzulwano thina sithumele amajoni ethu afike afe kwezi ndawo. Xa kufuneka sityale imali kwezi ndawo kungenelela ezi ... English: ... superpowers. IsiXhosa: Iyadika le nto kwaye kufuneka siyixoxe njenge ... English: ... national interest. Mr B N HERRON: Deputy Speaker, the global economic impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has been described by the President of the World Bank as catastrophic. It is a crushing blow to South Africa, we were depending on a resurgent global economy to mitigate the disaster of state capture and to stimulate post-pandemic recovery. We desperately need this recovery. Millions of unemployed South Africans will remain trapped in poverty for as long as our economy fails to grow by at least 3% per annum. Rising commodity prices may well be an outcome of this war and may advantage some sectors of our economy, but equally rising oil prices will be disastrous. Before Putin’s invasion, we were predicting our economy would grow by 1,8% this year. But oil prices which have already doubled in the last six months, could trim a full percentage point off this projected growth, which is a devastating setback. But, what can we do about it? President Ramaphosa recently indicated that in the course of a discussion with his Russian counterpart the subject of South Africa playing a role as a mediator was raised, and this is an important development. When South Africa joined Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, BRICS it was said that although our economy dwarfed those of our BRICS partners, our experience of managing our transformation from apartheid to democracy was of immense global value. This unique capital has already enabled South Africa to contribute to settling conflicts on the other side of the world. In this regard, we can think of our role in advancing peace in Northern Ireland, and brokering the Lockerbie deal. The President was himself involved in peace negotiations in Northern Ireland in the late 1990s, and we can draw important lessons from the leadership of President Mandela at this time. When South Africa was approached to mediate in the Northern Ireland conflict, former President reportedly said that: Our country does not intervene in the conflict in another country without being invited to do so. Mandela apparently required written requests from all the parties involved. We agree with the government that the situation in Ukraine demands negotiation and compromise. We know that President Ramaphosa has spoken to President Putin, but has he also spoken to the Ukraine President, Zelenskyy? Lesson number two from the Northern Ireland mediation efforts was Madiba’s unequivocal insistence on a ceasefire. Applying this right now, means that Russia must withdraw her troops. Deputy Speaker, we stand unequivocally for mediation and peace. We have a roadmap that we have followed once before. Are we willing to use it again? Thank you very much. Mr A M SHAIK EMAM: Thank you, Deputy Speaker. Let me start off by saying that any casualties in a war are the people themselves. Therefore, the National Freedom Party is of the view that a negotiated settlement will go a long way in preventing the loss of lives. However, the question I want to ask today, hon Deputy Speaker, is this when the people in Palestine are losing their lives being raped and murdered there is no cry from anybody, no passion. When the same thing happens in Syria we hear nothing. When the same thing happens in Libya we hear nothing. When the same thing happens in Iraq we hear nothing. When the Ukrainians are violating the rights of other Ukrainians, particularly in the Donbas region, there is nobody crying for those people. What is a reason for that? What about India? Why is there nobody in this country raising the concerns of the Indian minorities of the Christians and the Muslims whose rights are being violated by the Indian government? Nobody in this country is saying anything about it. Now, North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, Nato, went on and bombed the many of the Russians allies, Russia could do absolutely nothing about it and stayed out of it. What did Russia say, demilitarisation, stay away from my Russian borders? If you noticed what has been happening since 1990, they are coming closer and closer and closer to the Russian border until they will make Russia so weak that Russia will have no other option, but to give in to them. That is what it is all about. However, who is the root cause of this whole problem? It is clearly the West and the United States of America that is the root cause of all the mayhem and chaos and destruction all over the world. Let’s talk about the biological laboratory which is funded by the Pentagon in Ukraine. Where is it coming from and why are they getting involved in those? Let’s talk about the number of people that were massacred by the Ukrainians, who have been detained without trial. Nobody has said anything about that as well. Okay, let’s talk about the shelling of the hospitals and the schools and the massacre and the mass grade that were found in Ukraine. Nobody says anything about that. Now, what is Russia asking for? Russia is saying that stay away from my borders and stay away from me. All you have been doing and remember Ukraine is being used as a fool by the United States and the West and they are falling into the trap like many other countries have fallen into the trap previously and that is what it is all about. Currently, there is a trap to the Russian Republic as a result of them coming closer to the Russian border, the eastern side. All Russia is saying is to stay away, and not to collude to the west because the west we all know that has a hidden agenda. What is their agenda? It is to want to wipe Russia off the map as well. That is what it is all about. Now, we come here and we look at one side of the story and we don’t want to give an objective view. Yes, indeed, it is not good to take side. I agree with whoever said that, but that is what we are doing here. We are forgetting about those people whose rights are being violated by the Ukrainians themselves, while the Ukrainians do not comply with the agreement that they even didn’t do, exactly what is Israel is doing that has violated every agreement that they even didn’t do. What about the ... [Inaudible.] ... agreement that they even didn’t do? What about the agreement in 1990, why have they continued to be violating those agreements? Therefore, let us look at this in an open mind. What is really going on in Russia-Ukraine? We would agree that, yes, indeed, that we need to mediate and find a peaceful solution. However, you cannot find a peaceful solution when Ukraine has been running away when they have been negotiating in a peaceful settlement. They’ve been done it again and again. So, that is exactly what it is all about. The National Freedom Party views this in a very serious light, particularly, I heard many people talking about wheat, it is time to grow your own wheat. We’ve got very fertile soil in this country, we don’t need to rely on the other countries. However, the important thing is this let us be objective, let us be objective when we discuss an issue that affects us in this country even though it is in the foreign soil. Thank you very much. [Time expired.] Mr N P MASIPA: Thank you. Mr President, let me be clear from the onset. The decision by your ANC government that you took to support Putin’s murderous campaign in Ukraine does not represent the generality of South Africans. History will record this as a moral failure on the part of the ANC government, not South Africans. It was the ANC that unashamedly abstained from condemning Russia’s actions at the United Nations’ General Assembly. When you called Mr Putin to express your support for his bombing campaign in Ukraine, you were doing so on behalf of the corrupt and morally bankrupt ANC. Still in the same spirit of ubuntu South African farmers who are affected by the ... [Interjections.] ... Can you protect me? The DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. Hon members, allow the member to make his points. Mr N P MASIPA: South Africans in the spirit of ubuntu just as they did during coronavirus disease, Covid, our farmers are donating some of their fruits meant for St Petersburg to Ukrainians that have been displaced. Hon President, stop your honeyed words with Putin. He is a warmonger. Mr President, what is your government’s plan to protect poor against rising food prices and farmers against rising oil prices? Is it not time to consider suspending petrol levies, securing new markets for our farmers and creating public-private partnership to fix the ports, to capacitate Foskor to produce more fertiliser, and to fix the broken animal health institutions. The DA calls on the department to stop the ill-thought Agricultural Produce Agents Amendment Act that’s going to close many markets if legislated in the current format. Therefore, we ask this House to seriously consider the amendment of Export Credit Insurance to include cover for perishable goods during unprecedented events. Hon President, in conclusion, your own version of quiet diplomacy on Russia is making the world a dangerous place. Condemn Putin’s actions now. We stand with Ukraine. Setswana: Rre S R MAHUMAPELO: Motlotlegi Modulasetulo, ere ke dumedise le botlhe ba eleng maloko a komiti khuduthamaga ya rona ya puso. Ke dumedisa le seboka sa batlotlegi botlhe ba kgotlatheo molao ya Aforikaborwa. Bagaetsho, re mekamekane le setataladi fa. Setataladi se ke ne kere mo letsatsing la gompieno re setote. Mme re se tota ka mokgwa o o ntseng jaana. English: One of the recent challenges we have to content with as the sixth administration, is infant political phenomenon of steenhuinism. This infant philosophy is a political residue of global imperialist onslaught on all progressive forces. One of the critical memory lapses, this steenhuinism philosophy severely suffers from, is saying and doing things in total disregard of historical context. It is inherently anecdotal. It has no capacity to comprehend both historical and dialectical materialism. That is why the DA et al will seek us to debate this matter in insolation from geopolitical objective and subjective factors. Which amongst other things, will inevitably impact on South Africa, Africa and other members of Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa, BRICS and other countries we have relations with as South Africa. The steenhacist DA seeks nothing else but for us to unthinkingly attack, isolate and treat President Putin as an international political skunk and a payara of modern history. This we shall not do as the ANC. [Applause.] Our principle position is that peace amongst nations ... The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Mahumapelo, please wait. Hon Faber, what you are doing is unparliamentary. You are doing something which is unparliamentary. Don’t repeat that. We don’t do that in the House. Proceed, hon Mahumapelo. Setswana: Rre S R MAHUMAPELO: Oho, ke ne kere a ye go tlalaka ko mmileng kwa, Modulasetulo. English: Our principle position is that peace amongst nations has to be achieved through negotiations, no matter the protracted nature of the situation. It is the same thing the DA does in this country by wanting us to forget that they are the political infants and forever fragile and vulnerable beneficiaries of apartheid colonialism. No matter how many times they seek to change their name, for expedient political relevance, we will forever be politically vigilant. We refuse. We are adamant and we shall never allow steenhuinism to set the agenda for the African majority. This philosophy will be fought ... The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Mahumapelo, please take your seat. Yes, hon Faber. Mr W F FABER: Hon Chair, on a point of order. The speaker is talking about steenhuinism. Is he talking about the Leader of the DA, hon John Steenhuisen ... [Interjections.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Wait! Wait! Hon members, ... Mr W F FABER: Hon Chair, if you can Rule on that please. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Yes, I will. So far, there is no Steenhuisen that is being talked about. I will look for the meaning of steenhuinism. in the dictionary and I will come back and Rule on it. [Laughter.] Hon Faber, what is it? I have Ruled. Mr W F FABER: Hon Chairperson, except if my hearing is not that well. But I heard the speaker speaking about Steenhuisen. [Interjections.] It is hon Steenhuisen, if he is speaking about Mr Steenhuisen ... [Interjections.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Can you please take your seat. Let me respond again. No! It is not like that. Proceed, hon Mahumapelo. [Interjections.] Setswana: Rre S R MAHUMAPELO: Bothata ba ditsebe tse di sa phepafadiweng sentle ke fa mokgwa o leng le bothata bo motlotlegi. English: This philosophy will be fought and suffocated until it can breathe no more, because its defeat it’s a defeat of global imperialists forces that seeks to perpetuate domination over other nations. Topple the democratically elected Presidents, denies them their rights, including the right to life and many others. This philosophy of steenhuinism depends and relies on twisted, exaggerated and sometimes mega dramatic amplifications ... The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Order! Hon members, please. Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: ... to mislead people in a continuous surge for political relevance. Steenhuinism, because of its short-sightedness, it will not be able to comprehend that South Africa will neither praise nor condemn either Russia or Ukraine because the normalisation of the situation to achieve peace has to be through protracted engagements. In addition, South Africa has made it clear that international humanitarian and human rights laws, sovereignty, etc. must form part of the basis for all and sundry to engage on a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The steenhacist imperial philosophy, shall never be able to comprehend the intricacies and complexities brought about by North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO, expansionism tendencies which shall inevitably illicit a response accordingly from Russia. Imperial residues embedded in steenhuinism suffers from acute memory lapses which for instance, ignores not only the facts but the truth, that Ukraine became part of Sodom governance system from as far back as 1667. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon members, before you speak. We have spoken about this room being too small so anything you say really disturbs. We can’t hear everything that the speaker on the podium is saying, please. It is not like that big House where we can haggle the way we want. Hon Faber, what is it? Mr W F FABER: Chairperson, I just want to make sure if hon Supraism is maybe talking about something else because I don’t understand what ... [Interjections.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Faber, you are wasting our time. That is not a point of order. [Interjections.] Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: What we will help him with, Chairperson, is to supranomics philosophy. [Laughter.] [Interjections.] Opportunistically, steenhuinism imperialist et al philosophy seeks to instil without success in the minds of the people that they must forget that in 2014, a democratically elected President in Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, was removed through external political influences. The Europe influence protest of November 2013 in the capital Kyiv against President Viktor exacerbated the situation. This was concocted and engineered only because President Viktor rejected a deal of greater economic integration with Europe. Steenhuinism deliberately sidesteps the truth that France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine engaged in ... [Interjections.] The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: House Chair, on a point of order. Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: ... an agreement since February 2015 ... [Interjections.] The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: House Chair, hon Mazzone on a point of order The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Mazzone, I can hear you. Yes, please proceed. Did you maybe raise your hand and I didn’t check? The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: I did raise my hand. Unfortunately, I was not noticed. But thank you for recognising me. [Interjections.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Members, please. I can’t hear hon Mazzone, please. I will request my Table staff to keep their laptops on so that the hands are seen. I’m sorry that we didn’t see your hand. You may proceed with your point of order. What is it? The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Madam Chair, its two points. One I would like to know if the hon Mahumapelo is willing to take a question. Secondly, I have just checked the Oxford dictionary and I have seen that steenhuinism stands for those who fights against tyranny and oppression. Will the hon Mahumapelo be willing to take a question? The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon member, the second one I’m not even going to take. That is not a point of order. The first one was saying? The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: If the hon Supra Mahumapelo be willing to take a question. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Are you willing to take a question, hon Mahumapelo? Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: Yes, I am willing to take a question next week Wednesday. The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: Why not now? Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: Wednesday, 2 o’clock. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Please, let’s listen to the question. Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: I was saying that I am very much willing and capable to take the question next week Wednesday, 3 o'clock. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Okay, thank you very much. He is not willing, hon Mazzone. Proceed, hon Mahumapelo. Mr S R MAHUMAPELO: This philosophy ... The CHIEF WHIP OF THE OPPOSITION: House Chair, can we just ... [Interjections.] [Inaudible.] ... if the hon member will actually be in South Africa and not in Russia getting treatment. Setswana: Rre S R MAHUMAPELO: Go diragala eng, Modulasetulo? English: The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Mazzone, I didn’t allow you to continue speaking. What is it now? He said he is not responding to your question but you keep on talking and I didn’t give you that permission. Please, continue ... [Interjections.] Hon Mazzone, please don’t do that. If you do that again I will have you removed from the platform. Proceed, hon Mahumapelo. Setswana: Rre S R MAHUMAPELO: Go botlhokwa go ba tsenya manokonoko, Modulasetulo English: This philosophy seeks to rob us of the truth that in April 2014, pro-Russian separatists’ activists resulted in self-declared peoples’ Republic of Donetsk and Luhansk, whose demands ranked from self-rule to union with Russia. But because steenhuinism is inherently embedded in self-praise, it seeks to mislead people that the only right thing to do is to ignore these realities and condemn President Putin. Furthermore, proponents of imperial residues expressed through this philosophy cannot run away from the truth that a second ceasefire agreement called Minsk II came into effect on the 15 February 2015 and it has also not achieved much. It is therefore important hon members, that we should try to take effort in exposing remnants of imperial ideas affiliations embedded in this Parliament. By reemphasizing the point that South Africa’s position during UN General Assembly Emergency Special Session on the conflict of Ukraine-Russia is not neutrality. Our position can be described as having proven our principledness. This means that ... [Inaudible.] [Interjections.] [Time expired.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Thank you, hon Mahumapelo. Just be sure that we have not taken any of your time with the point of orders. We always switch the thing off. Hon Steenhuisen, ... The LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION: Madam Chair, I would really like to make a motivation that we give the hon Mahumapelo some more time to speak. I was really enjoying his explanation of steenhuisenism and I think the House would do with a good dose of it. [Interjections.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Thank you. Unfortunately, we are working according to the Rules of this House. [Interjections.] Hon members, lets proceed and call on ... [Interjections.] Order! The Chief Whip of the Majority Party and the Leader of the Opposition, allow us to proceed. May we please proceed to hon Jafta. Mr S M JAFTA: Hon Chair, we enter this debate at the critical time in the history of the world. Global peace is at its lowest. Food security is threatened. Climate change is on our doorstep. Protectionist policies continue to lock out emerging economies. War is now preferred over dialogue. Human rights are violated with impunity. Hon members, I sketch out all these global challenges in order to highlight the devastating impact on the Russian invasion in Ukraine. Our views on this debate are, therefore, informed by our commitment to global peace, global security, to human rights and put national sovereignty of states. The impact of this war to South Africa, to Africa and to the globe was well-articulated yesterday by the United Nations, UN, Secretary-General. In his statement he issued a stern warning that this war “is also an assault on the world’s most vulnerable people and countries”. Amongst his concerns was the impact of this invasion on the global food value chain, especially because the world’s 45 least developed countries import at least one-third of their wheat from Ukraine or Russia. We also studied reports from other international agencies and future for South Africa looks bleak. These are the facts we established. Firstly, South Africa imports between 70% and 80% of the fertilizer used in its agriculture industry from, amongst others, Russia, as the country’s dominant trade partners. This means the agricultural sector will severely be affected by this war. This will in turn affect crop yields and the cost of food for consumers. As the demand for fertilizers increases, supply will be eroded. Secondly, fuel prices will continue to take a hammer. Russia is our main source of gas, coal, fuel and oil. Loadshedding will worsen as the cost of diesel increases. This will affect Eskom’s emergency electricity stream supply which largely relies on diesel and coal. Consumers will be hard hit and the gap between the rich and the poor will be widened. Given all these challenges, the world has to unite. Our stance has always been that dialogue and negotiations between the realistic prompt and informed by our commitment to human rights, food security and global peace. We urge all the role players ... [Time expired.] ... to ... advance the wellbeing of the citizens of the world. I thank you. Mr W M MADISHA: Hon Chair, people of the world have risen to condemn the killings of the poor people in Ukraine and have even committed themselves as the international community to lay down their own lives to save the remaining people of Ukraine. As we speak now, more 2,9 million women and children, grandfathers and grandmothers have run away from their own motherland to escape the horrendous attacks from Russia. Young men and the youth are fighting to protect their own motherland. But, South Africa, which has received support from the international community when South Africa fought for freedom and democracy has basically risen to support the killers. I say they have risen to support the killers because when the people of the world came together in the General Assembly to say ‘No’ to the massacres of the ordinary people, the ANC government said ‘Please do it alone, we won’t support peace’; what a shame. This is extremely terrible. Now, when we come back home we are speaking about the economic problems that we face as a country, as a sequel to the problems that are happening there in Ukraine. Sanctions and other forms of punishment declared on Russia by the international community will negatively affect South Africa and all her people. For example, firstly, fuel prices, the main driver of inflation, will negatively affect every South African. Second, agricultural businesses, inter alia, SA Breweries, SAB Miller, farms maintenance, food supply chain, will be affected negatively. Third, Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications, SWIFT, from which Russia is now excluded, will also hit South Africa very hard. Fourth, whether the South African government accept it or not, unemployment in South Africa will rise further. Fifth, all this will, without doubt, lead to a lower Gross Domestic Product, GDP, performance than in 2021. Sixth, even, for example, the R77 billion businesses South Africa has with Russia, will be affected. Seventh, Russia’s major banks have been hit with sanctions and this will affect South Africa as well. I refer to, amongst others, Vneshtorgbank, VTB Bank, Otkritie FC Bank, open joint-stock company, OJSC, Novikombank, Sberbank, etc. Now, these are the kind of problems [Time expired.] which we are going to be faced with and South Africa, what they have done is extremely evil. Thank you. Mr M NYHONTSO: House Chairperson, hon members, we are again assembled here to discuss the superpower conflict over their security and spheres of influence based on the American Monroe Doctrine. In the 1960s, based on this doctrine, the United States, US, President, Kennedy, forced the Russian President, Khrushchev, not to put any missile or nuclear weapons in Cuba. The world at that time stood still asking itself who will blink first, the Russians did. Today, Russia’s Putin is attacking Ukraine in order to prevent Biden’s America and North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO, putting their weapons and nuclear missiles at its doorsteps. The PAC’s longstanding foreign policy on the relations with superpowers is that we do not choose sided in their fight unless they affect Africa and humanity. It is clear that this fight will affect Africa and other poor nations of the world in that the fight already ensured that the prices of oil, petrol, gas, have gone sky high and inflation has also risen. We, therefore, take a stand and roundly condemn both America and Russia for threatening world peace, Africa and humanity’s livelihood with the third world war, which is actually a European war over their spheres of influence. The PAC, therefore, condemns Russia and America’s abuse of power and bully tactics which affect the lives and livelihoods of, especially Africa, and humanity, and call on them to stop immediately the war over ... [Inaudible.] ... and negotiate peacefully whatever differences they may have over Ukraine. As we condemn them we cannot refrain from further observing that the Western imperialist countries like US and United Kingdom, UK, who, when they meet their match in Russia, are not as brutal and destructive as what we saw in Libya and Iraq. Finally, we call on the superpowers, including Russia and America, to do away with nuclear weapons and the doctrine of spheres of influence between America and Russia must be abandoned. The Security Council must be reformed to remove the veto powers of the superpowers and the continent of Africa and other continents must have permanent seats in the Security Council. I thank you. Mr M G E HENDRICKS: Hon House Chair, Al Jama-ah generally concurs with the position that was adopted by President Ramaphosa. Al Jama-ah agrees with meaningful engagement. It is time now for the invasion to stop or at least a cease fire and human corridors to be established so that more meaningful engagements can take place. Those who stand with Israel are quiet when Israel President is implementing President Ramaphosa’s meaningful negotiation. Dozens of world leaders are involved in meaningful negotiation including Turkey at the request of NATO, America and Germany. So, what we heard from the Official Opposition in the House today is all thunder but no lightning. They undermine South Africa’s positions, which is close to being very unpatriotic. You can’t undermine a Commander-In-Chief and for Al-Jama-ah we are already in a third world war. [Interjections.] Al-Jama-ah is concerned, not only ... [Interjections.] ... of Ukraine but about the African diaspora means ... [Interjections.] Mr T W MHLONGO: You are not Al-Jama-ah; you are ANC lite ... Mr M G E HENDRICKS: ... which is directly and indirectly destroyed by the war. South Africa’s economy is injured by this war. Our economy has been scuttled. The South African government and we, as political parties, must collectively think out of the box and not inside the box like some of our other political parties are doing by pursuing methods, in not only mending this ailing and frail economy, but also growing and expanding it in inventive ways. As a country we should gather our energies to counter this serious situation and we should apply desperate measures in dealing with our affairs as best as we can so that we, in our region, can be economically afloat. We ask that meaningful engagement now be taken to the next level. Thank you very much, hon House Chair. [Interjections.] [Applause.] The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you very much, hon Chairperson, respectfully to the House, all members of the House, first and foremost ... Setswana: Ke ne ke kopa go leboga ... English: ... all those members who stood here from the different political parties ... Sesotho: ... ba ileng ba bona bohlokwa ba hore ba bue ka kgotso, ba ileng ba bona hore boemo ba Russia le Ukraine, ke boemo bo hlokang kgotso. Ba ile ba utlwisisa hore... English: ... in order for peace to happen ... Setswana: ... re tshwanetse gore re ba thuse re puso ya Aforikaborwa ... English: ... to get to that peace. Standing here, hon Chair, I know that there are those that are saying that I studied in Russia and therefore. Yes, I studied in Russia and yes, I wouldn’t have studied in Russia had I not been prosecuted and be thrown out of the borders of South Africa, and find myself in the cold, not because I wanted to be there, but simply because apartheid made life difficult for us. Having said that, I also want those who say so to appreciate and understand that Russia being a country that supported us during difficult times, nothing stops us from engaging and saying, when there are challenges and problems, let us sit and talk about them. This very country that I enjoy its freedom and many on my left, who enjoy its freedom because it was delivered on them on a silver platter, I want to tell them today that, negotiations was a difficult moment for us as South Africans, and negotiations needed us to compromise and we did so, through negotiations we knew that it was going to bring unity in South Africa we have today. Therefore, hon Chairperson, those who speak because they want to continue to create fear amongst our people, in the past, there was ... Afrikaans: ... die swart gevaar. English: Today, there is something which I think is almost like an “ANC-gevaar”! I don’t know if there is something like that, but the bottom line is this, Chairperson, we live in a country where our President, Cyril Ramaphosa speaks ... [Interjections.] ... he’s your President too. President Cyril Ramaphosa, he’s called upon, to engage in peaceful negotiations, and the fact that some members ask, “did he speak to the President of Ukraine?” You don’t know about that. So, don’t talk about things you don’t know. President Cyril Ramaphosa will speak to the President of Ukraine when the President avails himself to speak, because this country called South Africa, understood from the very beginning that negotiations are about two sides that are in a war or in a conflict, and in this particular case, I can assure you, hon members that, President Cyril Ramaphosa will speak to both sides to make sure that both sides are brought to the table. What actually sometimes is surprising, hon Chairperson and hon members is that, we took a decision to negotiate, and we sat with people who we never thought we would sit with. We sat and we negotiated, thank God, look at the country that we have today. So, let me also indicate that, we are driven to negotiations not because of anything but peace. Those of you who are making noise, you don’t know that war and you’ve never felt that war, you’ve never live in countries affected by war. All you know is to come and sit in this House and make noise about a war that you never felt nor experienced. Chairperson, let me also say that, the conflict that is raging, the most people that are affected by it, are the women and children. Let me also say to you, hon members, do not be one-sided about the women and children who have been affected by this conflict. I think that the hon members from my side of the ANC, have clearly elaborated on this matter, and I will not go into that. But what is important is, this is going to affect us all. Therefore, it is important for us to see where can we engage, so that there can be peace. However, Chairperson, let me also indicate that, we are driven by what is in the Freedom Charter, that there shall be peace and friendship, not only in South Africa, not only in Africa, but the entire world. Chairperson, we are very conscious of the fact that, approaching and treating the symptoms of this conflict in isolation from underlying causes, does not help to remedy the destabilising situation into which we are being drawn. In fact, treating symptoms provide an opportunity to stop incurable cancers to spread. Coming to this particular issue that we are discussing, we must not lose sight of the fact that, the peace, friendship and neighbourliness between Russia and the Eastern Bloc countries is a matter that, without undue external influences, interferences and enticements, the countries of that region can settle between themselves. We are not talking about one country; we are not talking about all those countries. Again, Chairperson, let me tell you and the hon members that, for conflicts that have been raging in the African Continent itself, we have been involved in finding solutions for those countries, that is why South Africa can be called beyond political parties and beyond the ANC. There are members who have been called for peace processes in South Africa, who are still being called by the world to come and assist in negotiations. So, when we stand here, Chairperson, we are not standing to say things that are not there, but we are saying things that we believe in them. When we stand here, Chairperson, we have seen war, we don’t read about it in the newspapers, we don’t google the war, we lived it, we felt it and we know it. Today, Chairperson, we fast forward to what is happening, and we must remind ourselves that, coming out of the Second World War, the United States, the United Kingdom, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway and Portugal formed what is called today, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO. Those who care to know, must ask themselves the question, why was it formed? Those who want to be truthful in history, they will tell you exactly, what the other members of the ANC were talking about here, Russia is simply saying, and for years it has been saying ... [Interjections.] The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Your time is up, hon Minister. The MINISTER OF SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT: Thank you. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Hon Cuthbert, please. Hon Cuthbert, ... Afrikaans: ... asseblief. [Please.] English: Proceed, hon Cachalia.  Mr G K Y CACHALIA: In 1939 Winston Churchill said: This is no war of domination or imperial aggrandisement or material gain; no war to shut any country out of its sunlight and means of progress. It is a war, viewed in its inherent quality, to establish, on impregnable rocks, the rights of the individual, and it is a war to establish and revive the stature of man. Eighty-three years later, after valiant attempts, many in vain, to uphold international law, this is where Ukraine finds itself with Russia’s invasion, without any plausible casus belli, employing a massive use of military force against civilians and the attempted hunting down of a legitimately elected government. Lamentably, the stance by our government, tardy, contradictory, placatory and wet, now makes us party to a 19nth century playbook of imperialism, a push to establish empire by any means, however brutal and destructive and augmented by the methods and tactics of the KGB, hon Zulu. As in all wars, lies abound, and the grand lie that liberal values create the basis for the conflict of civilisations chimes well with this government and its Communist party. It’s a view that resonates with our government, defined by a venality in its cosy relationship with Putin, and so, to those who have spoken before to appease and apologise, to those who have attempted, via much whatabouterry, hon Shaik and Hendricks, sir, on absolve themselves of a clear moral obligation, we say: There comes a time when we must confront the current evil with a view to establishing an international order that says, never again, and that uses this moment as a benchmark to address all transgressions, many of which in the past were unfairly predicated by might and the protection of spheres of influence. To the ANC and hon Zulu, tardy as they are now, and tardy as they and the SACP were, in support of the war against Nazi Germany, until mother Russia entered the fray, and who are now complicit, by virtue of an absence of a clear denunciation of Putin’s imperialism: best you listen because there comes a precipitous moment in life of every nation that calls for courage and honour. Do the right thing, for the world is watching and history will judge. Infertile references apart, from an economic perspective, South Africa exports more to Swaziland and Lesotho than to Russia. So, hon Mahumapelo, who was fired from his province, be Putin that in some Saratov and drink it. You have been schooled by Steenhuisenism, which is an ascending philosophy. Now, go and do the right thing, for God’s sake. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Thank you, order, order hon members. Order, hon members. I am now inviting, the Deputy Minister of Finance, Dr Masondo The DEPUTY MINISTER OF FINANCE: Madam Speaker, hon members, in his address to the House last week, the Finance Minister briefly remarked on the likely impact of the conflict between Russia and the Ukraine on our fiscal framework and revenue proposals. Today, I will elaborate on the likely impact of the conflict on our overall economy as per the aim of today’s parliamentary session. Let me start by saying that we are deeply concerned by the loss of lives, the humanitarian impact and the forced displacement of people as a result of this conflict. We also recognise the effects of the conflict which will not be felt in Ukraine and Russia but across the world. We therefore reiterate the call for the silencing of the guns and a return to meaningful dialogue, negotiation and compromises. This conflict carries with it significant risks for the global and local economy, both of which are yet to be fully realised. The conflict will certainly intensify some of the risks we had already highlighted in the Budget Review 2022. The following are three main channels through which the South African economy will be impacted by this conflict. The first is the prospect of persistent supply and demand shocks and imbalances, which risks driving inflation higher and tightening financial market conditions. On the supply side, as other hon members have already indicated, there have already been sharp increases in the prices of crude oil, maize, wheat, and sunflower oil due to supply-side disruptions. This is the logic of supply and demand - where there is low supply and high demand, the prices always increase. Again, as other members have said, higher fuel will add to inflation, which will in turn reduce the disposable incomes of consumers at the time when they are already struggling with the negative impact of COVID-19. Local fuel prices have risen to more than R21 per litre for the first time ever in March. This is unprecedented, and as a potential to completely disrupt our economic recovery efforts. This, Madam Speaker, makes the work that we have embarked on with the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy to review the approach to fuel pricing an urgent exercise. We are working tirelessly to complete the work as soon as possible. We cannot make any hasty decisions; as any changes we make on fuel pricing will have a lasting impact on the industry. In the meantime, we encourage those industries that qualify for the diesel rebate on the fuel and Road Accident Fund to apply for the facility. The adverse effects of developments in Ukraine have not spilled over to South Africa significantly, with the rand having depreciated by only 1,3 % in wake of the conflict. The changes in the global growth outlook may impact South Africa through the outlook for our main trading partners. Current predictions indicate that the impact of the conflict will lower overall global GDP by around 0,2% this year, but the impact on each region will vary. The second channel through which the South African economy may be impacted relates to our trade links with the rest of the world. While direct trade between South Africa and Russia, as well as between South Africa and Ukraine is not substantial, the shock to global trade will have an impact on the demand for exports as well as imports prices. Less than 1% of South Africa’s exported goods are destined for Ukraine and Russia combined. On the other hand, imports flows from both countries is also less than 1%. The bulk of South Africa’s exports to Russia are agricultural, mainly citrus and other fruits, while imports are dominated by copper, wheat, and agro-chemicals such as fertilisers. The citrus industry exports approximately 7% to 10% of total South African production to Russia. As such, the consequences of the conflict and the sanctions on Russia may pose some risks to the delivery and payment for these volumes. I understand that the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development is working with the industry to consider alternative markets, should the conflict persist. Despite the identified risks, there’s potential improvements in South Africa’s export commodity prices performance to fill in the demand for primary commodities. This could continue supporting the mining sector and our public finances. We expect that the rally in export commodity prices will provide added support to the local mining sector. Gold prices have surged globally, rising to their highest prices in a year, mainly due the metal’s status as a safe-haven asset. Because during this crisis, usually investors prefer to invest in safe assets such as gold. We have also seen a resurgence in palladium and rhodium prices, supported by the easing of the supply shortages that hit the automotive industry in 2020 and 2021. The third channel through which South Africa could be affected is via financial links. Although we are concerned about the impact of the conflict on capital flows into the South African economy, our trade and financial links with both nations are relatively small. This is expected to provide consideration insulation against the trade and financial shocks caused by the ongoing conflict. Although South Africa’s sovereign risk is likely to increase, the potential depreciation in the domestic currency is expected to boost our exports and contribute towards improvements in the current account. The economic consequences will be severe for Ukraine and Russia, and significant for Europe. But unless there is a serious escalation, the effects on the US, China, and most of the emerging world would be limited. With the situation still developing and fraught with uncertainty, it is not easy at this stage to fully quantify the potential impact of the conflict. What we can do in the meantime is to protect ourselves from external uncertainty by maintain the balanced framework we proposed in the budget. It is prudent for me to emphasise what President Cyril Ramaphosa has already said, that any resolution to the conflict and the resulting peace agreements must be grounded in diplomacy, dialogue, and mediation. Our approach is rooted in Article 4 of the United Nations. It reads in part: The parties to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice. We fully support this principle and stand ready to support the process of reaching a peaceable end to the conflict between Russia and Ukraine. I thank you, hon Speaker and hon members. The HOUSE CHAIRPERSON (Ms M G Boroto): Thank you, hon Minister. Hon members, that concludes the debate. Before I ask the secretary ... Okay ... [Interjections.] Okay. Afrikaans: Wie praat nou? [Tussenwerpsels] Ek is die baas. English: Hon members, before we proceed to ask the secretary to read the Second Order, I must just say before time that all the Whips should prepare for their members because according to section 196(8)(a), even if they agree or not, they have to record their support. So, as there will be declarations and all, please make sure that all your members have logged in. As we proceed, may I ask the secretary to read the Second Order. Source: Hansard, Parliament, 15 March 2022 