Tshwane and Mogale City adjustment budgets will accelerate service delivery and stabilise finances  1 March 2022 The City of Tshwane and Mogale City Local Municipality yesterday passed their adjustment budgets which focuses on improving service delivery and stabilising their cities’ finances. The approval of these adjustment budgets follows weeks of broad consultation with our coalition partners. These budgets will enable our Mayors to finally implement their plans. In the City of Tshwane, R622 million has been made available to deliver on basic service delivery items such as maintenance of streetlights and repairing potholes. R6.2 million has been allocated for the relocation of at-risk informal settlements. R250 million will go towards the protection of the city’s electricity and water infrastructure. R198 million has been allocated to water and sanitation material to cut down on water leaks. The budget will prioritise putting more water meter readers on the ground so that billing is accurate. In Mogale City, Mayor Tyrone Gray can finally put aside the ANC-approved budget that the city has been operating under since he took over office last year November. Mayor Gray’s adjustment budget focuses on achieving a cash-backed surplus realising budget that will generate additional revenue and reduce expenditure. The proposed adjustments will see to a net decrease of R44 million. Economic services will receive R7 million to go towards the construction of Krugersdorp Taxi ranks and to pay outstanding invoices. Public Works, Roads and Transport will be allocated R24 million to fund projects in the roads division. The DA applauds both Mayor Randall and Mayor Gray who had to make tough decisions and cut down on certain costs to ensure that their municipalities remain functional. The DA is excited that residents will experience the difference of what a DA-led municipality can bring, we look forward to seeing improved services in both municipalities. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 1 March 2022