Minister Pandor wishes Mr Dangor well as the new DG of DIRCO 1 April 2022 The Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, Dr Naledi Pandor, has congratulated Mr Zane Dangor on being appointed the Director-General of the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (DIRCO). Mr Dangor takes up the position of Director-General today, 01 April 2022. Mr Dangor has served as a Special Advisor to the current and former Ministers of International Relations and Cooperation. Before joining DIRCO he served as the Interim Representative of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) to the African Union (AU) and the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (ECA). Prior to that post, Mr Dangor served as the Director-General of the Department of Social Development, having been a Deputy Director-General where he worked for over 12 years. Mr Dangor has extensive experience in the field of human rights, having specialised in transitional justice issues. He has worked on human rights and development both nationally and internationally in a variety of civil society organisations. For over a decade he was the Executive Director of the Development Resource Centre. He holds two Master’s Degrees – a Master’s in International Law, and a Master’s in Public and Development Management both from the University of the Witwatersrand. He is also widely published in the area of international relations. The Minister wishes Mr Dangor well in his new position, and has no doubt that he will hit the ground running as he has been part of the department and is familiar with the challenges the department faces. Ranking top amongst the issues that Minister Pandor said she hoped Mr Dangor would prioritise is for the department to receive a clean audit – something which has eluded the Department for a number of years. “I wish Mr Dangor well as the Director-General of the Department of International Relations and Cooperation,” Minister Pandor said. Statement issued by DIRCO, 1 April 2022