TWO STATEMENTS FOLLOW: Shocking farm murder at Moorreesburg  6 April 2022 The latest farm attack and murder on a farm near Moorreesburg serves as clear proof that this type of crime must be declared a priority crime. Mr Frans Koch (69) and his wife, Ingrid (65), were attacked in their home on Tuesday on their farm Klipheuwel. Mrs Koch was murdered and her husband, who is currently in the hospital, was seriously injured in the incident. A suspect has been apprehended and will appear before the court soon. The FF Plus concurs with Agri Western Cape: One farm murder is one too many. The FF Plus will keep fighting for a much-needed special rural safety unit that focuses on the prevention of farm attacks and combats this type of crime in cooperation with farmers and other safety and security forums. The FF Plus expresses its deepest condolences to the family of the deceased and wishes Mr Koch a speedy recovery. Statement issued by Dr. Corné Mulder, FF Plus MP and provincial leader: Western Cape, 6 April 2022 *** DA condemns Moorreesburg farm murders, calls on SAPS to allocate more resources to rural communities 06 April 2022 The DA in the Western Cape condemns the farm attack which took place on Klipheuwel Farm, outside Moorreesburg, on Tuesday. The South African Police Service is investigating a case of murder and assault after a couple was attacked while visiting their son at the farm. The attack, unfortunately, resulted in yet another farm murder in the Western Cape, claiming the life of Ingrid Koch while her husband, Frans Koch, suffered severe physical injuries from the attack. I am grateful for the good work of those who assisted to apprehend the suspect. The DA urges SAPS to deal with this matter decisively so that the perpetrator is brought to book and to send a strong message that these senseless attacks will not be tolerated. Across the country, rural communities are under siege due to heinous acts of violence, yet, Police Minister Bheki Cele has not shown any sign of remorse for the plight of farmers and farmworkers as he has failed to properly implement the rural safety plan. Rural communities are at great risk of crime due to their isolation from police stations. This requires a greater need for special police resources to combat farm attacks and killings as well as the high incidents of other criminal activities that negatively affect farming. MPP Andricus van der Westhuizen says: “The DA extends its deepest condolences to the Koch family and we hope and pray for the speedy recovery of Mr Koch. We urge the SAPS to conduct a thorough investigation and we call on the legal system to deal effectively and speedily with this case. I will, furthermore, engage with the Department of Community Safety on the steps it is taking to avail resources and assist SAPS to strengthen rural safety. We will be putting in questions to the Minister of Agriculture to understand the extent of safety concerns and attacks on the farming community –  both farmers and farmworkers - and how these are impacting our rural areas.” Statement issued by Andricus van der Westhuizen, MPP, DA Western Cape Spokesperson on Agriculture, 6 April 2022