Diepsloot murder an indictment on populists for fanning xenophobic flames 7 April 2022 Note to Editors: Please find attached English soundbite by Siviwe Gwarube MP, as well as an Afrikaans soundbite by Cilliers Brink MP. The DA is horrified to learn of the brutal murder of Elvis Nyathi, a man who was hunted down in his community in what seems to be a xenophobic attack. We send our deepest condolences to his family and friends. We do so with a heavy heart because this should have never happened. This reprehensible and senseless attack could be a sign of things to come should strong action not be taken by government to crack down on these criminal elements and fix our broken immigration system which has been a powder keg for this kind of vigilantism and criminality. However, blame must also be placed on populist politicians and leaders who fan the flames of xenophobia in our country. The cost will always be lives lost in a spate of violent attacks. The DA has warned that the xenophobic rhetoric by populists is not only dangerous and but is also misplaced. Blaming foreign nationals for the deep inequality, joblessness and poor service delivery in South Africa is the highest form of scapegoating. It is the ANC government that should answer for these national crises and not foreign nationals. Additionally, it is the ANC government that should answer for the broken mess that the Department of Home Affairs has been. We note that the Police Minister, Bheki Cele, has committed additional resources to the area to investigate the seven murders that took place over the weekend and we call upon him and his department to expedite the interventions needed in this area. The criminals in government, as well as in our communities must be held to account and prosecuted. This needs to happen before we see the rise of xenophobic attacks similar to those of 2008. Violence is never the answer. South Africans should reject those leaders who use them to stoke this kind of violence and then feign ignorance when it ravages through our communities. Issued by Siviwe Gwarube, DA National Spokesperson, 7 April 2022