Release of actuarial valuation report for the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) 26 April 2022 The statutory actuarial valuation report on the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF), prepared by African Origins and Alexander Forbes as at 31 March 2021, has been released by the GEPF after a long delay. The purpose of the valuation is to investigate the financial soundness of the Fund in terms of the funding objectives of the Fund’s funding policy. The report can be accessed by the following link: https://www.gepf.co.za/evaluation-report/ In terms of Rule 19 of the GEP Law, there is an obligation to provide members with certain information relating to the Fund. The fiduciary health of the Fund is obviously of utmost importance to its members. The AMAGP has been anxiously awaiting the release of the report and asks why the Board of Trustees released the report as late as six months after its submission by the actuary in November 2021, by placing it on its website in April 2022 and keeping quiet about it. This is not acceptable. In discussing certain aspects of the valuation, reference is made to clause 1.14 of the report. Some of the critical objectives of the valuation were: to determine whether the existing assets of the Fund are sufficient to cover the fund's liabilities accrued to the valuation date; to determine whether the funding level meets the minimum funding requirement as outlined in rule 7.2 of the Fund’s rules and the requirements of the funding level policy adopted by the Fund. Some of the important findings of the valuator were: The assets of the Fund were sufficient to cover the best estimated liabilities in full, with a funding level of 110% (up from 108% in 2018). The current position therefore meets the trustees’ targeted minimum funding level of 90%. The Fund does not have sufficient assets to cover the recommended solvency reserve and other contingency reserves in full. Allowing for the full solvency reserve and other contingency reserves reflects a long-term funding level of 74,3% (down from 75,5% in 2018). R187 million are available to cover these reserves, implying that only some 20% of the recommended reserves are funded. Although the minimum funding level is satisfactory, AMAGP is, and has been concerned for quite some time, about the shortfall on the long-term funding level which has been declining for a number of years now, being down with 1,2% since the previous valuation, the lowest ever. As a pension fund provides for the long term, this should obviously be of concern not only to pensioners and serving members, but to the Board of Trustees. The actuarial valuation to have been conducted as at March 2020 was postponed, but estimates based on the outdated valuation as at March 2018 indicate that it was highly likely that the liabilities exceeded the assets by about R133 billion in March 2020, and that therefore the Fund had not been solvent at that stage.  This “interim valuation” had never been made public by the GEPF.  The favourable minimum funding level as at March 2021 was made possible by the decline in the annual growth of pension liabilities and an exceptional performance of the JSE, during 2020/21.  This is unlikely to be repeated in 2022. Already on 8 January 2020 AMAGP queried the insolvency of the Pension Fund. In this regard we refer to our statement of that date at the link provided below: https://www.amagp.co.za/media/amagpstatement8jan20ispensionfundsolvent.pdf The present actuarial report does nothing to allay our fears of two years ago. The actuaries have for years recommended to the GEPF and the minister of finance that the government should increase its contributions to fund the shortfall. In the latest valuation, the valuator recommends that the required employer contribution rate be increased from the current 13,5% to 14,2%, by some R2,5 billion per annum. In view of the GEPF’s stated funding policy of striving towards a long term funding level of 100% or above, it is the AMAGP’s concerted opinion that it is high time for the government to increase the contribution rate, also in such a manner as to eradicate the accumulated shortfall. Finally, mention needs to be made of the updated actuarial interest factors in the report. This is of interest to the serving members. For the most part it has reduced since 2018. Will the GEPF implement these, and if so, from what date? The GEPF also must be reminded that it needs to consult with the trade unions before implementing these changes. The GEPF certainly would want to avoid a repetition of the scenario where the courts ruled against implementing these changes without proper consultation. Issued by Adamus Stemmet, Spokesperson, Association for the Monitoring and Advocacy of Government Pensions, 26 April 2022