EFF STATEMENT ON THE R1-BILLION EMERGENCY RELIEF FUNDS FOR KWA-ZULU NATAL Saturday, 16 April 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) notes the delayed announcement by the Finance Minister, Enoch Godongwana that R1-Billion will be made available in response to the deadly floods in Kwa-Zulu Natal. This announcement comes almost a week after heavy rains, flooding and the loss of human life, which currently stands at 395. A sober State, at its very least is expected to immediately intervene at the first announcement of severe weather conditions, given that responsive interventions saves lives and provides practical support to communities and families. Instead, the hyenas led by Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa showed up days later for a straw mat photoshoot while scouting its next looting expedition. It is also worth noting that the South African National Defense Force (SANDF) who was deployed harass households and confiscate sanitary pads following the July 2021 civil unrest are only due to assist in the flooded province in the upcoming week. This is after 395 deaths which their advance evacuation training could have prevented. South Africans must take note of the continuous and deliberate delays by government for intervention that mitigates loss of live. It is community members and groups with no training who are seen putting their lives on the line to save others because the State fails in its constitutional mandate to save lives. South Africans, our status remains as is - we are on our own. As such, let us continue in our efforts to help each other. Any expectation that the R1-Billion in relief funds will actualize as relief is illogical, with the recent lived experience of the R500-Billion Covid 19 relief fund that did not build a single new hospital being a point of reference. Instead government dug 1-million graves in eager anticipation of our deaths. If this current government did not consider a pandemic worthy of it fulfilling its constitutional mandate, a natural disaster in one province certainly is of no significance to Cyril Ramaphosa. The EFF continues to send its deepest condolences to the family and friends who have lost loved ones and maintains that all EFF structures will continue to provide practical assistance. The EFF further salutes individuals, NGOs, communities, and religious groups assisting humankind and doing so beyond expectation because of government failures. Statement issued by the Economic Freedom Fighters, 18 April 2022