DA questions Police Minister on SAPS’ neglect in case of murdered 6-year-old 1 April 2022 The DA has submitted Parliamentary questions to Police Minister, Bheki Cele, relating to what can only be described as a hopeless and totally inadequate response by SAPS to the death of 6-year-old Thiwe Masengeni. This after the DA visited the family of little Thiwe at their home in Inanda on Human Rights Day to determine for ourselves exactly what had transpired and led to the brutal death of the 6-year-old. Thiwe and an 8-year-old girl known to her went missing from their home on the evening of 1 March. It was reported to the Inanda Police, only to be told that nothing could be done for 24 hours. SAPS therefore undertook no search for the missing children. The family and the community however started searching for them and early the following morning, the 8-year-old was discovered naked and traumatised. The body of Thiwe was discovered shortly thereafter in the Inanda Dam by family and a friend. She had been brutally murdered, beaten and strangled. The community had identified the alleged killer with SAPS, yet nothing was done. At no stage did SAPS even bother to visit the parents involved or commence with an enquiry. The body of the suspected child killer was later found hanging from a tree. To date the family remain in the dark about any SAPS action and there has been no communication with family members. This type of nonchalant and careless attitude displayed by SAPS is totally unacceptable and if someone in SAPS has failed in their duty then there needs to be consequences. We don’t need SAPS officials who treat our people with such disdain. It is for this reason we submit the following written question for a response from the Minister: Has a case number been opened, if so what is it? What is the current status of this docket? Why did the police require 24 hours to begin searching for the missing 6- and 8-year-old girls who the community alleged were taken and advised the police as such? Were forensic samples taken from the deceased, if so, have these been shared with the mother? What follow-up actions did detective Gwala take in respect of communication with the family members? What forensics were done on an alleged suspect who committed suicide on 9 March 2022 in Inanda to link him to the murder? Has this information been shared with the family members? Is the Minister satisfied that this case has been handled in terms of procedure regarding the murder of this nature, if not, what does he plan to do about it? The DA urges Minister Cele to ensure that all officers of the law protect and serve the people of KZN. It’s a simple mandate. In the DA’s vision of an Open Opportunity Society for All, children are safe from harm and citizens are able to walk in our cities and townships without fear. Criminals are caught promptly and prosecuted speedily, and victims of crime receive appropriate support and are treated with compassion. Issued by Francois Rodgers, DA KZN Leader, 1 April 2022