Solidarity brings contempt charges; files application for warrants of execution against BLF 19 April 2022 Solidarity today filed a case for contempt of court as well as bringing an application for warrants of execution against the Black First Land First (BLF). This comes after the BLF failed to apologise to victims and its failure to pay compensation to the victims in terms of a court order issued against them earlier this year. In March this year the Equality Court in Johannesburg among other things found the BLF spokesperson, Lindsay Maasdorp, guilty of hate speech. This came in the wake of remarks made on social media about the disaster that took place at Hoërskool Driehoek in Vanderbijl Park when a footbridge collapsed, killing three learners and seriously injuring many others. Among other things, BLF members said that the death of three white children was divine intervention that got rid of three future problems. Maasdorp and the BLF were ordered to pay R50 000 to each of the victims’ parents involved in the case, and they had to apologise to the parents for their remarks. To date, they have not complied with either order. Anton van der Bijl, head of Legal Matters at Solidarity, explains: “The statements made by Maasdorp and the BLF were appalling and the suffering of the parents who lost their children on that day, is unthinkable. Such despicable behaviour cannot be pardoned at all. By showing contempt for this court order the BLF is not only undermining judicial authority, but they show no respect for the children who lost their lives, and they are adding to the suffering of the parents”. According to Solidarity, the BLF’s actions have irreversibly intensified the trauma and emotional suffering of the Driehoek school community. “No legal process can ever heal these parents and the community they belong to, but we will continue to fight for justice against such heinous forms of racial hatred. We have to put up a fight today to ensure that there are consequences when victims are being victimised in the midst of their grief and that simply because of the colour of their skin,” Van der Bijl concluded. Issued by Anton van der Bijl, Head: Legal Matters, Solidarity, 19 April 2022