Unpacking the New Code of Practice re Mandatory vaccinations for Covid-19 SUMMARY On 4 April 2022, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that the National State of Disaster would be lifted with effect from 00:00 on 5 April 2022. One of the effects of this is that the Code of Good Practice: Managing Exposure to SARS-COV-2 in the Workplace (Code) became effective on 5 April 2022. Whilst it is not a requirement for employers to implement a mandatory vaccination policy in their workplace, those employers who wish to do so and who are governed by the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OHSA) should be guided by the Code, a summary of which is set out below. The Code provides employers who have implemented a mandatory vaccination policy or who intend to implement such a policy with the necessary clarity and comfort, firstly, in relation to vaccinations status and whether an employer is entitled to this information, and secondly, in relation to whether employees may or may not be dismissed for failing or refusing to vaccinate and thereby acting in contravention of a mandatory vaccination policy. It remains to be seen whether employers who are yet to implement such policies will do so in light of the relaxing of restrictions. There have been several media reports of large organisations choosing not to implement their mandatory vaccination policies and to rather focus on persuading employees to vaccinate. In his address on 4 April 2022, President Ramaphosa noted that by ending the National State of Disaster, "we are each taking more individual responsibility for protecting our health and the health of others. CONTINUING OBLIGATIONS Employers ought to be aware of their continued obligations to their employees, other workers and members of the public to: The Code is intentionally general because workplaces and their requirements differ. Departures from the non-obligatory provisions of the Code may be justified in appropriate circumstances. Any deviation from the Code must be justifiable. WHAT ARE EMPLOYERS REQUIRED TO DO WHEN IMPLEMENTING A MANDATORY VACCINATION POLICY? Employers are required to undertake a risk assessment to give effect to their obligations under OHSA. The risk assessment will dictate the content of the plan which must include any measures to be implemented in respect of the vaccination of employees. The risk assessment and plan must include details of: The risk assessment and the plan may include details of: The risk assessment and the plan may only be done in consultation with trade unions, the health and safety committee, health and safety representatives or employee representatives, whichever is applicable. Employers are also required to notify workers of the contents of the Code as well as the plan and manner in which it intends to implement the plan. Employers remain obliged to provide workers with information pertaining to details relating to the virus, including the manner of transmission, the manner in which transmission may be reduced, the symptoms associated with infection as well as the nature of vaccinations and their benefits and contra-indications. Importantly, employers are required to take measures to determine the vaccination status of their workers. Employers are also required to require workers to immediately inform them if they experience COVID-19 related symptoms. Where there is evidence that an employee contracted COVID-19 arising out of and in the course of employment, the employer is obliged to lodge a claim for compensation. Ventilation remains a critical tool in the battle against transmission of COVID-19 and the Code contains extensive provisions in this regard. VACCINATION OF EMPLOYEES Clause 12 of the Code provides that employers must do the following: Importantly, employers may require employees to disclose their vaccination status and produce a vaccination certificate. Where an employee refuses to vaccinate, the employer must: If the employee produces a medical certificate which confirms that the employee has contra-indications for the vaccine, the employer may refer the employee for a medical evaluation to confirm this at the employer's expense. If the employer accepts the medical certificate or the further medical evaluation which confirms that the employee has contra-indications for vaccination, it must accommodate the employee in a position that does not require the employee to be vaccinated. KEY TAKE-AWAYS FOR EMPLOYERS Jacqui Reed, is an employment lawyer at law firm Herbert Smith Freehills.