ANC statement on the impact of floods in KZN province  12 April 2022 The African National Congress (ANC) extends its heartfelt condolences to the families who lost their loved ones following the devastating heavy downpours in the province of KwaZulu Natal. The magnitude of severe weather conditions has resulted in enormous damage to infrastructure across the province and also left dozens of people destitute. While disaster management teams work around the clock to assist residents that have been affected by the inclement weather conditions which led to localized flooding of human settlements and roads across the province, ANC issued an instruction to all its employees to roll up their sleeves and fast-track interventions. We believe that the government should join forces with the private sector to help the victims of floods. Reports indicate that the number of fatalities as a result of the heavy rains could possibly increase as some people are still reported missing. The ANC is pleased with a number of interventions being rolled out by the government at all levels with the Ethekweni Metro, KwaZulu Natal Provincial government, and the National Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) as the custodian of disaster management taking the lead. During this time of need, more help is required for our people through the provision of temporary shelter, aid and much-needed relief. The ANC urges all its members, volunteers, supporters, and the public at large to join and embrace all disaster management efforts geared towards the humanitarian mission of rescuing all victims of floods in KwaZulu-Natal. All relief efforts should be properly coordinated to ensure that all people affected by the floods get help. These conditions have the potential to further exacerbate the socio-economic conditions of our people who are still recovering from the rippling effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The ANC further urges the national government to consider declaring a state of disaster in KwaZulu-Natal following the floods. The ANC also notes and appreciates the services of the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) and other stakeholders who have been hard at work in the evacuation process. During this difficult time, the ANC calls upon residents to remain calm while all measures are being undertaken to attend to the situation. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 14 April 2022