Barry Bateman joins AfriForum’s Private Prosecution Unit 28 April 2022 The prominent journalist Barry Bateman is joining AfriForum’s Private Prosecution Unit as Communications Manager. Bateman announced the news this morning in a video on Twitter. In his new role Bateman will focus on bringing some of the inner workings of the Private Prosecution Unit to the foreground, shedding light on the matters that do not necessarily reach the headlines. Bateman will also write in depth about the concept of private prosecution. “About two decades ago when I decided to become a journalist, the primary motivating factor was the issue of accountability. Today, that has not changed. I did not think twice when offered the opportunity to join Advocate Gerrie Nel and his team at AfriForum’s Private Prosecution Unit,” says Bateman. Bateman has been recognised for his work over the years: In 2012 he was acknowledged at the Taco Kuiper Investigative Journalism Awards. In 2013 he was among the Mail & Guardian’s 200 Young South Africans, and in 2014 Media Magazine included him in their list of Top 40 Under 40. He has also won the National Press Club’s Journalist of the Year. In 2014, Bateman co-authored the book, Behind the Door with his colleague Mandy Wiener. The Oscar Pistorius and Reeva Steenkamp Story was the most comprehensive telling of the tragedy that had taken place in 2013. “Many of the biggest stories I have pursued in my career have been about holding those in power to account. Joining Nel’s team will contribute to that work, albeit from a different perspective. I look forward to bridging the gap between the incredible work of the unit and newsrooms across the country,” Bateman concludes. “Barry is another arrow in our quiver to deal with selective prosecutions and the collapse of the Criminal Justice system. He brings a distinctive skill set which will undoubtedly augment our strategy to establish further and develop the concept of private prosecutions,” says Adv. Gerrie Nel, Head of AfriForum’s Private Prosecution Unit. ANNOUNCEMENT: I have joined @afriforum’s Private Prosecution Unit. pic.twitter.com/NcZKTMS29q Issued by Chanté Kelder, Media Relations Officer, AfriForum, 28 April 2022