City to send support to KZN in wake of flooding disaster, Mayor appeals to Capetonians to donate supplies 14 April 2022 I am saddened by the devastation and loss of life that has taken place in KwaZulu-Natal as a result of this week’s flooding. My thoughts and prayers — and those of the entire Cape Town community — are with all KZN residents and especially those who have suffered loss. The City of Cape Town will deploy a team of highly-skilled emergency response personnel to KZN as part of a multidisciplinary team assembled by the Western Cape government. This team will assist the province’s disaster management personnel and augment their capacity in whichever way they require. The deployment is in the process of being finalised. I have also reached out to the office of the Mayor of eThekwini to express my empathy and offer further help from the City. Capetonians are renowned for their kindness and generosity at times of crisis, as demonstrated by overwhelming goodwill from residents during fires and the drought. I am appealing to Capetonians to once again offer assistance — this time to the people of KwaZulu-Natal — by donating the items on the list below. These items will be packed onto trucks and transported to the province. Donations can be dropped off at the list of City fire stations below, from 08:00 on Friday, 15 April until 20:00 on Saturday, 16 April. Finally, I ask that on this Easter and Passover weekend, which also falls during the holy month of Ramadaan, we all keep the people of KZN in our prayers. Together, we hope for a speedy end to this crisis and the human suffering to which it has given rise. Items for donation Bottled water (5 litre bottles and larger) Non-perishable foodstuffs in strong packaging (not single items) Blankets (wrapped in plastic) The following Fire Stations will serve as drop-off points (from 08:00 on Friday until 20:00 on Saturday): Roeland Street fire station Lakeside fire station Strand fire station Goodwood fire station Bellville fire station Issued by Media Office, City of Cape Town, 14 April 2022