Stable local governments in the Western Cape a commitment to true freedom through service delivery excellence 26 April 2022 On the eve of Freedom Day, let us be reminded anew of what freedom is: Freedom is equal opportunity in a society where no one is left behind. Anything less than this, is not freedom. Freedom Day gives South Africans of all race, gender and ethnicity hope for a better future. Freedom, however, is much more than hope. It is more than political policies and political promises. Freedom follows where party political leadership lives up to its supreme duty: stable, good governance by compliance with legislation and regulations, working to improve lives continuously and sustainably. Without excellent service delivery in every municipality in our country, freedom will remain but a hope, and freedom will not be achieved. Western Cape local governments are superior by most metrics and these successes are the result of years of professional, competent management and intervention by an effective, efficient and well-oiled machine – a Provincial Department of Local Government that operates proficiently through the effective coordination of many parts. DA governments, and governments of other political parties are included on the road to sustainable and excellent services delivery. Therefore, the DA in the Western Cape will strive to work in unison with any political party represented in any council in the Western Cape, for the sake of service delivery. The DA has only one requirement: stable and responsible partners, governed by compliance with legislation and regulations. I implore every single political party leader who is represented every Western Cape local and district council to accept my unconditional good intentioned invitation to join forces for good governance. All of us, who have a passion for service delivery on the back of good governance, should take hands and not bump heads. The voters deserve responsible, calm decision-making for consistency, equality, and excellence. For service delivery! Let us rise to excellence, and not fall to trickery. Let us deliver the freedom that Freedom Day represents. Let us re-affirm our commitment, as individuals, as activists, as political leaders, to work hard for the freedom of all. To work hard for the safety of all, to create job opportunities, to keep the lights on in our towns, to deliver better services, and for all equality and freedom. Issued by Tertuis Simmers, DA Western Cape Interim Provincial Leader Elect, 26 April 2022