EFF FREEDOM DAY STATEMENT Wednesday, 27 April 2022 The EFF marks the 28th Anniversary of the first democratic election, which was held on the 27th of April 1994. Popularly known as "Freedom Day", today was when the first democratic election of the democratic dispensation was held, where black people were for the first time allowed to vote and determine their own political affairs. The democratic transition which is observed today, was prematurely declared Freedom Day, as 28-years later, not much has changed in terms of the objective realities of African people. Due to the much heralded peaceful transition, South Africa has operated on a false-premise of unity and social cohesion, without economically altering the ownership of the means of production. We thus have a façade of a democracy, coupled with a non-event of Independence, because our political freedom was characterised by a negotiated settlement in which the perpetrators of the heinous crimes of Apartheid were never held accountable. As a result of the undue and reckless consideration of our oppressors when we transitioned to democracy, the land of South Africa remains in the hands of a white-minority, at a level of 72% compared to the measly and rotten 4% of land which is under African control. The majority of mines remain controlled by foreign interests, while the banks, financial sector and Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), is in the firm grip of a white-settler community. Due to this, the political freedom obtained in 1994 has become meaningless, because those who control our economy have ultimately determined our political and economic trajectory. The policies of South Africa are crafted in Washington and by an elite group of financial institutions, who stand to benefit the most from the disenfranchisement of African people. The majority black population remains in space-less townships, packed in shacks on top of one another, with little access to drinkable water, education, sanitation and housing. Black life in South Africa is one of squalor, defeat, hopelessness and landlessness, and accordingly we are the most susceptible to disease and tragedy. The EFF therefore reiterates that political freedom without economic freedom is meaningless! We re-commit ourselves to the 7 non-negotiable Cardinal pillars enshrined in our Founding Manifesto, which will usher Economic Freedom In Our Lifetime. These are; a. Expropriation of South Africa's land without compensation for equal redistribution in use b. Nationalisation of mines, banks, and other strategic sectors of the economy, without compensation. c. Building state and government capacity, which will lead to the abolishment of tenders. d. Free quality education, healthcare, houses, and sanitation. e. Massive protected industrial development to create millions of sustainable jobs, including the introduction of minimum wages in order to close the wage gap between the rich and the poor, close the apartheid wage gap and promote rapid career paths for Africans in the workplace f. Massive development of the African economy and advocating for a move from reconciliation to justice in the entire continent. g. Open, accountable, corrupt-free government and society without fear of victimisation by state agencies. It is through these 7 Non-Negotiable Cardinal Pillars, that one day we can truly claim genuine and authentic freedom. The current status quo, makes the celebration of "Freedom Day" nothing but an exercise in pacifying the collective consciousness of our people, and calling upon them to remember the days of liberation in order for them to forget the present social decay confronting them. Let us intensify our efforts in recruiting towards 1 Million Members before the end of 2022, to ensure we have a qualitative and quantitative membership which will win political power and deliver our people from poverty, corruption and landlessness. Statement issued by the EFF, 27 April 2022