Alarming spread of foot-and-mouth disease can be curbed 5 April 2022 The safety net, which was supposed to prevent any further outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, appears to be full of holes, but things can be rectified if existing measures are strongly imposed. The latest outbreak of this disease in Gauteng and the North West can most probably be attributed to the illegal transport of infected animals from the eastern parts of the country, where preventative measures and the required zone fences are not in place. An immediate consequence was that China placed a ban on the import of all cloven-hoofed animals and their products, like wool, from South Africa. South Africa exports about 80% of its wool to China, which represents about R4,8 billion. This development has a direct impact on the general South African economy, which is trying to recover after the damaging effects of the Covid-19 regulations, particularly now that the state of disaster has ended. By now, the South African agricultural community probably feels like it has been hit by the Biblical plagues as it has to fight off foot-and-mouth disease, bluetongue, African swine flu, bird flu, locust, fly and mosquito plagues, fires, a prolonged drought and subsequent floods, causing further devastation and destruction. After the widespread foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in 2019, strict control measures were put in place and funds were earmarked for the safe zones to ensure that the infection does not spread. Although South Africa's national government fulfils an oversight role over animal health, the associated responsibilities have been devolved to the provincial departments, which must see to it that the measures are enforced and that the necessary fences are maintained. The latest outbreak indicates that this is not happening and raises questions about the government's monitoring and oversight role as well as control over the provinces' enforcement of the existing measures and the maintenance of safe zone fences. Provinces do indeed have a shortage of state veterinarians, which is directly related to non-compliance with measures, but cadre deployment and its inevitable consequences, like incompetence, mismanagement and corruption, play a significant role in the current problems. For example, in the first three quarters of the previous financial year, the basically insolvent Agricultural Research Council (ARC) transferred approximately R400 million back to provinces for combating foot-and-mouth disease after it had initially not been used. With the previous outbreak in 2019, South Africa lost its international status with the World Organisation for Animal Health, which dealt a severe blow to agriculture and the livestock industry in particular. The FF Plus will keep engaging with the national Department to see to it that the measures that are already in place are enforced and that the necessary maintenance is performed on all zone fences. Statement issued by Tammy Breedt, FF Plus MP and chief spokesperson: Agriculture, 6 April 2022