Subject THE SOUTH AFRICAN NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCE HAS BEEN ACTIVATED TO ASSIST WITH DISASTER RELIEF IN KWAZULU NATAL (KZN) 18 April 2022 The province of KwaZulu Natal (KZN) has been hit by torrential rains and downpour that has triggered mudslides. More than 30 000 people have been affected by this natural disaster that caused the loss of life and livelihood. The infrastructure that has been damaged includes: houses, schools, roads, bridges, buildings as well as economic and business infrastructure. The following Force Structure Elements are deployed to assist in the disaster management efforts and activities: C Army. Provide Force Structure Elements to assist in the disaster management efforts and activities. Activities could include protection, support to mop-up work, extraction, technical assessments, transportation of humanitarian relief equipment or goods. a. The SA Army was instructed to activate 10 000 troops for Operation CHARIOT. The immediate activation of 5 x Battalion (Bn) Headquarters and 15 x Coys (which include the support and engineer capabilities) to mobilise in the province of KZN. The additional 45 x Coys will be on a readiness state to mobilise, when and if instructed to render support as part of the disaster relief teams in the area of KZN. The deploying troops will include regulars and reserves, with the reserve capability that is on active call-up and already enlisted at their various reserve units where they are currently registered. b. The SA Army will render support as part of Op CHARIOT in erecting field accommodation, provisioning of fresh water with its water purification systems, and the deployment of electricians for restoring power and plumbers for restoring the water supplies in the areas that have been affected by the floods. The SA Army pledges includes 31 x 10 000 litre Water bunkers, 3 x water provisioning systems, 2 x water points with 1 litre bottled water/plastic sachets, a Platoon of electricians and plumbers, 60 x 16x16 tents and bedding for the affected communities. CAF. Provide Air capabilities to assist in the disaster management efforts and activities. Activities could include search and rescue, extraction, reconnaissance/assessment missions, trooping transportation of humanitarian relief equipment of goods. a. 2 x Medium Utility Helicopters (MUH) b. 2 x Light Utility Helicopters (LUH) c. 1 x Fixed Wing Aircraft SAHMS. The South African Military Health Services (SAMHS) must provide operational health support in the disaster area of KwaZulu Natal. a. Provide medical support (including ambulances) to the SANDF in various positions in KwaZulu Natal as required to support the disaster relief efforts. b. Provide Medical Officers (Dr's), Nurses, Psychologists, Social Workers and Pharmacists according to the requirements in the above-mentioned disaster areas. C Log. Provide Defence Works capabilities and technical expertise to assist in the disaster management efforts and activities. Activities could include requirements for construction equipment and technical personnel (artisans). a. Construction equipment. b. Technical personnel! artisans. Op Chariot Force Structure Elements are deployed to the affected area in support of COGTA/Provincial disaster relief structures with specific disaster relief related tasks as authorised by the PROVJOINTS. The assistance of the SANDF is executed under Operation CHARIOT, which is a registered SANDF operation, where the SANDF provides humanitarian and disaster relief assistance to all South Africans, when and where required. This Operation is authorised by the Chief of the South African National Defence Force. Issued by: South African National Defence Force, 18 April 2022