EFF statement on Chief Justice Raymond Zondo’s utterances regarding the composition of Judicial Service Commission 29 April 2022 The EFF condemns the utterances of Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, who in an interview with the South African Broadcasting Co-Operation (SABC), expressed a desire to have the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) comprised of more Judges. In a blatant misrepresentation of the spirit and letter of our democracy, Zondo has claimed that as a sitting Chief Justice, he would prefer more Judges to sit in the JSC, than politicians. These utterances undercut the intention and role democratically elected leaders are envisioned to play in a critical institution such as the JSC. This is because the politicians who sit in the JSC are elected by the people of South Africa, to ensure that their will which is expressed through the ballot, finds place in the highest levers of power. In essence, this means that politicians who represent the democratic will of the people sit in a process to recommend the appointment of Judges, who will preside over the laws that govern the people. To seek to reduce the role of elected people in the JSC, in favour of colleagues recommending the appointment of each other, is pure elitism. Zondo makes these nonsensical blunders precisely because he has an uncontrollable obsession with appearing on television. It is high time that Zondo chooses whether he wants to be a Chief Justice, or a television presenter like the ones we used to have on the SABC during Simunye, "We are one". There was absolutely no verifiable reason for him to engage in an interview, as there is no public crisis nor any judicial announcement to make. He is engaged in a permanent program to profile himself in his short 2-year tenure before retirement. The EFF calls on the Chief Justice to refrain from taking public platform to promote elitism that is not in sync with the democratic desires which are expressed through an electoral process. To air into public discourse a desire for an elite pact of judges to play a more determining role in appointing themselves is self-centred, elitist and irresponsible. Issued by EFF, 29 April 2022