Statement by Comrade Elias Sekgobelo ‘Ace’ Magashule about the ANC Branch, Regional and Provincial conferences that are in the process of being held 6 April 2022 We noted with much appreciation and encouragement the successful and disciplined Provincial and Regional conferences that were respectively held in the Province of Mpumalanga and the Lower South Coast Region of KwaZulu-Natal. The success of these, and other conferences that have already been held throughout our country, and the manner in which delegates at these conferences gave expression to the will of their branches in the deliberations and elections that took place, strengthen our trust and hope that the African National Congress will continue to carry out its historical task to liberate the people of South Africa from all the remaining shackles of oppression - including economic exploitation and oppression. Together with the comrades that have been elected in various conferences that have already been held, we congratulate the newly elected Chairperson of the ANC in Mpumalanga, comrade Mandla Ndlovu, as well as the Officials and the whole Provincial Executive Committee that were elected. Similarly we congratulate the newly elected Chairperson in the ANC KZN Lower South Coast Region, comrade Mondli Chiliza, together with the whole Regional Executive Committee. We urge all the leaders who have emerged at the various conferences, and who have been given the trust of ANC members in our branches, to be humble servants of our people. We urge them to work for principled unity, and to ensure that all feel welcome in the African National Congress. Engagement and inclusive democratic debate must be order of the day, rather than any triumphalism and purging. It is of critical importance that we must always continue to strive for inclusivity and unity in our continuing commitment to implement all the Resolutions of the ANC 54th National Conference in their entirety. We refer specifically to the critical economic empowerment Resolutions in favor of the expropriation of land without compensation, the nationalization of the South African Reserve Bank, the establishment of a State Bank, and the general and fundamental transformation of our financial institutions so that they can serve and empower the majority of black (especially African) South Africans. With regard to these critical Resolutions we must be principled, democratic, practical and solution orientated as we prepare throughout the country for the upcoming ANC Policy Conference, where we will take stock of what we have achieved, and also where we have fallen short. This is a critically important precursor for the 55th ANC National Conference, that is also due this year. We extend our heartfelt condolences to comrade Mondli Chiliza with the tragedy that befell him and his family, so shortly after his election as Chairperson of the Lower South Coast Region, when their beloved daughter passed on. We share in their pain of having lost a young and promising life. May Her Soul Rest In Peace. As the African National Congress proceeds with the holding of further Branch, Regional and Provincial Conferences throughout our country we urge our members to treasure and honor the historical liberation roots and democratic culture of our beloved Liberation Movement. When we remain true to these ideals there can be no doubt that we will overcome the challenges that we are currently faced with, and together we will eventually prevail. Then surely the ANC will self-correct and ultimately remain true to the ideals of unity and full liberation that have - throughout the 110 years of our existence - been our mainstay and inspiration. Issued by Ace Magashule, 6 March 2022