EFF congratulates Mamokgethi Phakeng on her re-appointment as Vice Chancellor of the University of Cape Town 2 April 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters congratulates the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Cape Town, Mamokgethi Phakeng on her re-appointment as the Vice Chancellor of the University of Cape Town. It is not only a stellar achievement for her personally, but a stern reflection of the transformative route the University is taking in empowering African women in senior roles of leadership. We commend the collective leadership at the institution for showing confidence in a black African women, a tendency not common in this country in recent times. Mamokgethi Phakeng has been at the centre of a new form of leadership, which promotes African values, promotes consultative relations with students in particular as critical stakeholders and has been a fierce opponent to a racist old-guard that has been resistant to change. We must never forget that her initial appointment came in the face of a poisonous smear campaign, which operated on the racist trope that a black woman in power is irrational, temperamental and prone to emotionality and bullying. The standards she confronted, are never set for men in positions of power, and women who are firm in their beliefs and value systems, are permanently painted as aggressive and difficult to work with. We are pleased that she overcame this hurdle and remains steadfast in her duties. The EFF calls on the Vice-Chancellor to immediately implement the provision of free sanitary towels to all students, as an exhibition of her commitment to providing dignity to the poor and vulnerable at the institution. It is a simple project, which does not require a complex institutional amendment or compromise. To date, it baffles us as an organisation why such a basic program has not been implemented, by a woman Vice-Chancellor who ought to relate to these struggles. The black girl child in Ditsobotla, Mamusa, Madibeng and Matlosana is inspired that they can see one of their own leading such a prestigious institution, which is highly regarded not only in the continent but the world. May her tenure bear progressive fruits for students and workers, and make the University of Cape Town an African institution that contributes to the development of the continent. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 2 April 2022