UNDER 600 LEARNERS TO BE PLACED IN GAUTENG 13 January 2021 The Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi has today, 13 January 2022, announced that under 596 Grade 1 and 8 learners are currently in the process of being placed at schools in the province. “We are aware that our District Offices are pressured with parents who seek assistance on Late applications, and those who are unhappy with schools they were offered. Our officials are working tirelessly to assist all parents. We also wish to appeal to the public not to threaten officials with violence, it is really unfair to them”, said MEC Lesufi. MEC DISGUSTED BY COMMUNITY DISRUPTION AT SCHOOL FOR LEARNERS WITH DISABILITIES MEC Lesufi has noted with concern about the disruption which occurred on Thursday, 13 January 2022, at Duzenendlela LSEN School in Orange Farm where some members of the community barred learners and teachers from entering the school. The incident allegedly took place this morning due to some members of the community demanding that the school be converted into a mainstream school, as well as claiming that the school excludes some learners. The said community members also demanded jobs and tenders from the school, accusing the School Governing Body (SGB) of appointing people outside the community. Duzenendlela is one of our few schools which educate learners with special needs. We condemn this disruption and strongly believe that is propelled by some  community members selfish acts which deprive the most vulnerable learners the right to education. “We have invested in improving and opening more schools for learners with special needs to reduce the waiting list and, as such, it is unfair for people to disrupt such a school and even go to an extent of demanding that it must be changed to be a mainstream school, in contrast actually the community should be calling for the opening of more such schools, ” said MEC Lesufi. SCHOLAR BUS INVOLVED IN ACCIDENT MEC Lesufi is saddened to have received the news of a scholar transport bus that was involved in an accident on Thursday, 13 January 2022 in Randfontein injuring two learners onboard. The incident is alleged to have happened this morning while the learners were being transported to school by our scholar transport bus to different schools. The two grade 12 girl learners who were onboard, to Phahama Secondary School and Thurso Lehakwe Secondary School respectively, sustained injuries and were taken to a local medical facility where their condition is being monitored. Circumstances surrounding this incident are under investigation by relevant authorities. KWA PHALO PRIMARY GENERAL ASSISTANT FATALLY SHOT The MEC is further disheartened by the fatal shooting which took place on Thursday, 13 January 2022, and led to the passing of a 49 year old male General Assistant from Kwa Phalo Primary School in Soweto. The General Assistant was allegedly shot on school premises this morning and was declared dead by paramedics on the scene. Police are currently investigating the incident. Our Psycho-Social Unit has been dispatched to provide necessary trauma support and counselling to those affected by this incident. “It is unfortunate to learn of such a tragic incident involving one of our dedicated General Assistants. As the Department, we send our deepest condolences to his family and loved ones, and we plea with police authorities to ensure that justice is served in this case,” MEC Lesufi said. LESIBA SECONDARY LEARNERS INVOLVED IN FATAL SHOOTOUT It is unfortunate to inform about a shooting incident which occurred on Wednesday, 12 January 2022 and resulted in the passing of two 16 year old Grade 10 boy learners from Lesiba Secondary School in Daveyton. It is alleged that the two learners had a quarrel yesterday during schooling hours. This allegedly led to the one learner fatally shooting the other learner on the head outside of school premises, then subsequently shooting himself. Police are currently investigating circumstances surrounding this shooting. Psycho-Social Unit officials were deployed to counsel members of the school community who were affected by this incident. “It is tragic to lose learners at the hands of violence as the academic year begins. We, wish to send our sincere condolences to the families of these learners. We also urge our learners to always refrain from any form of violent behavior,” MEC Lesufi said. Statement issued by Gauteng Department of Education’s Spokesperson, Steve Mabona, 14 January 2022