Department of Sport, Arts, Culture and Recreation response to the untruths contained in the DA statement about the Gauteng Sport Awards and the relief to artists and athletes*  25 January 2022 The Gauteng Department of Sport, Arts, Culture and Recreation notes yet again that the DA opts to spend its time engaging in gossip instead of being productive. Whilst appreciating that the opposition by its nature; does little else but to find fault in the governing party. We had hoped that such criticism would be constructive and based on facts instead of being dependent on gossip. Below are facts to dispute the gossip of lies. LIE: Claim the Department has not spent on COVID relief for artists and athletes and should have used the alleged R7mil towards relief. - FACT: The Department has to date spent R19,6mil on COVID relief, of which close to 3000 artists and athletes have benefited. Gauteng was further congratulated by Minister Mthethwa for being the number one province in providing the largest amount for relief, accounting for 44% of the National count. Followed by the Western Cape where the DA governs, who account for only 11%. It's therefore laughable that the DA claims to care about artists and athletes yet where it governs it does not place its spend on the very artists and athletes. LIE: Claim that the Department spent R7mil for the Gauteng Sport Awards. - FACT: The DA mischievously does not indicate that the Department had budgeted R9million for the Sports Awards this financial year, but spent R6,9mil instead. Due to the MEC indicating at the beginning of her tenure that the Department would cut its expenditure on events, so more funds are allocated to our School Sports and Arts Wednesday Leagues development program. Geared at entrenching sports and arts in previously disadvantaged schools so kids can be productively engaged, so they may be steered away from engaging in dangerous substances such as drugs and alcohol and teenage pregnancy. LIE: Claim the Department spent large amounts on hiring venues for the Gauteng Sports Awards. - FACT: The big cost drivers for the event was the creative industry; which includes all technical expertise to host the event: these are individuals who work behind the scenes to make the event a success. Further including mainstream and development artists such as Oskido, Kabza de Small, Kamo Mphela, AKA, Costa Tich, Brenda Mtambo, Young Stunna, Lulo Cafe, Benny Chill, African Chill, Smangori Dancers, City Boyz, Bayeza Marimba, and Tembisa Red Devil's our pantsula dancers from Tembisa now flying our flag high internationally. Additionally, costs also went to the price money for the winning athletes, the car given away as part of the competition and towards the live production by SABC1. - The DA therefore exposes its minuscule comprehension of the gig economy; as it assumes that hosting an event is only about the venue. There are many creatives involved, and therefore jobs created out of events. It's in this regard the province has a Gauteng Events Strategy in place which guides this important area of work in strengthening our Gig economy. 4. LIE: Claim the Department has since the 2012/2013 financial year to the 2020/2021 financial year, spent over R61 million on this annual event. - FACT: The Department questions where the DA has received its numbers that tally to this amount. As for example the Department did not spent R9,5miI on the Awards in 2019/2020 as alleged in the statement. - Even if this had been the case the DA is making a mountain over what would have been a less than 1% investment over 10years. If the R61mil is to be calculated against the Department's just over R8 billion allocation over 10years. As the lion's share of our budget goes towards developmental sports and arts activities in the province. We reiterate that whilst appreciating the existence of opposition parties as born out of the hard fought for democracy by the current governing party. We advise the DA in the province to at least do its due diligence and verify information before sending out statements based on gossip. The Department remains committed to delivering to its sectors even in the face of unsuccessful gossip peddled. Issued by Nkosana Mtolo, MEC's Spokesperson, 25 January 2022