EFF statement on the South African Reserve Bank decision to increase the Repo Rate 28 January 2022 The EFF condemns and rejects the decision of the South African Reserve Bank Monetary Policy Committee to increase the repurchase rate by 25 basis points to 4 per cent. The MPC raised the repo rate in the last meeting, anticipating an imaginary runaway inflation. The increase of 25 per cent basis point is the second increase of the repurchase rate after 25 basis points increased in November 2021. This decision is senseless, irrational, and ultimately a heartless war against workers and the poor. The main concern for the MPC is the continued profiteering by the financial sector, particularly banks, at the expense of all other sectors, workers' income and poor people in general. Furthermore, the increase of the repo rate comes when petrol prices have reached an all-time high of R20 per litre, and it is expected to increase to well over R20 in the next adjustment. This will lead to increases in transport costs, a further reaping off of workers's income. The EFF has called on companies to prioritise jobs and salaries as part of recovery strategy instead of maximising profits at all costs, including laying off workers. However, in all sectors, workers are poorer today than they were before the scourge of Coronavirus. Today's poverty rate has left many without a roof over their heads and less food on the table. The majority of workers struggle to keep up with bare minimum living requirements. This increase in the repurchase rate will certainly make their lives a living hell: making work itself a futile exercise. Those who survived Covid-19 lockdowns and were able to keep their homes will struggle to keep up with these payments and are likely to lose only homes they have. To ask an working class that already lives in heavy chains of debts to pay more for living expanses will only collapse the economy. It is concerning that instead of supporting the economy towards recovery. The MPC has taken an extremely reactionary approach to monetary policy. Even when the champions of neoliberal policies like the IMF have cautioned about the rush to try and return to high interests rates as it is likely to stifle recovery, the South African Reserve Bank has chosen to the opposite direction. They have chosen to prioritise banks and their balance sheets over lives. The EFF rejects the MPC decision to increase repo rates and sees it as a heartless war against workers, the poor, black people in particular. There is no justification for such high-interest rates when the world has just come out of a global pandemic besides profit for a highly financialised economy. This provides further evidence that South Africa does not have a coherent and informed macroeconomic policy designed in the interest of the whole economy. It remains a macroeconomic policy for the rich and maximisation of profits at all costs. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 28 January 2022