Law enforcement agencies should protect the lives of councillors 30 January 2022 ActionSA calls on law enforcement agencies in KwaZulu Natal to take a more active approach in the protection of the lives of members of councils across the province. This follows yet another killing in KZN of the IFP’s Amajuba District Speaker Reginald Bhekumndeni Ndima who was gunned down outside his home on Saturday 29 January 2022. This is the second brutal killing of a councillor in the month of January as Minenhle Mkhize from ward 103 in eThekwini Municipality was shot several times also outside of his home. He was laid to rest yesterday. ActionSA is calling on the provincial commissioner to intervene in these seemingly politically motivated killings and is appealing for the protection of those who have been elected by the public to run municipalities across the province without fearing for their lives. The flouting of the rule of law is what has led this province to be the murder capital of South Africa with an alarming number of mass killings where victims are as young as a 14-year-old. Where is our law enforcement? Where are our intelligence agencies? What is the source of these killings? ActionSA is demanding answers from the KZN police commissioner Nhlanhla Mkhwanazi and the minister of police Bheki Cele. As councillors we are under siege and councils across the province cannot afford to continue to take from the public purse in order to protect the lives of councillors. It is not their mandate, and it takes away from funds that should be earmarked for service delivery initiatives. ActionSA Provincial Chairperson Musa Kubheka said’I will personally be writing a letter to the provincial police commissioner requesting a meeting to ascertain how far the police are with investigations, what arrests or prosecutions have been made in relation to all political killings in KZN’ The police should do their jobs and treat such killings with urgency. Continued failure to do so will see a state of collapse where criminals will continue to insight political intolerance in a province that is still healing from the bloodshed that engulfed it in the fight towards democracy. ActionSA is committed to its goal to advocate for the rule of law. This is a provincial and national imperative because a country that cannot protect its citizens is a chaotic state. ActionSA will exhaust all possible avenues to ensure that the rule of law prevails in this country, and this includes providing South Africans with ethical leaders who are prepared to fight for the protection of this province, country and its people. Issued by Musa Kubheka, KZN Chairperson, ActionSA, 30 January 2022