ANC DEPLOYMENT SUB-COMMITTEE MEETING Date Venue Time : Friday, 11 May 2018 : 10th Floor Boardroom, Luthuli House : 08H30 -10H10 Present: David Mabuza (Chair), Jessie Duarte (Coordinator), Sdumo Dlamini (NEC), Mildred Oliphant (NEC), Sfiso Buthelezi (NEC), Susan Shabangu (NEC), Natso Khumalo (ANCVL), Skhumbuzo Mpanza (SANCO), Solly Phetoe (Cosatu), Meokgo Matuba (ANCWL). Apologies: Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma Minutes: The minutes of the previous meeting held 19/03/2018 were adopted. Inputs from Deployed Cadre in Government: 1. Department of Environmental Affairs 1.1 SANPARKS Board A list of 48 names was made available with CV's abbreviated. The Deployment Committee agreed that Comrade Edna could appoint an interim board that should add the names of ANC cadre as per her discussion with the DP. Comrade Edna is requested to provide full details including work experience of the people to be appointed. 1.2 CEO lsimangaliso Comrade Edna is allowed to choose from her identified short list. She is required to send full CV particulars to the next meeting of the Deployment Committee which sits on 21 May 2018. 2. Appointment of Non-Executive Members of the Board of Directors of SEDA an agency in the DSBD 2.1 Comrade Lindiwe Zulu expressed a view that the Deployment Committee creates a database of all ANC members who are deployed in every position in government, business, boards and also research names of those previously deployed. 2.2 Deployees nominated to SEDA Board Comrade Zulu provided a list of 10 names of which three (3) are from the previous board and their term expires in August 2018. The Deployment Committee requested two (2) spaces on the board. The names must reflect a better geographic spread, namely Free State, Mpumalanga and North West. 3. Public Enterprises board A general point was raised that all the boards needed to be reviewed. ' 3.1 Eskom urgently needs to appoint a CEO. The Deployment Committee agreed to support Phagamani Hadebe 3.2 The Eskom Interim board needed to be regularized and properly appointed within the existing rules of the state. Comrade Pravin will check the conditions under which the interim board was established. 3.3 Transnet Board The CEO and CFO are members of the board. The CFO has been suspended and the position is vacant and will be advertised. The nomination to the board presented was pulled from the database of the OPE. The Deployment Committee agreed that the Minister appoints an interim board. That he chooses six (6) people and the Deployment Committee will forward six (6) nominations to him by Friday 19 May 2018. 3.4 Denel Board The Chair has resigned. Comrade Pravin provided the names of 16 people of which two (2) spaces on the board are reserved for the CEO and CFO. The Deployment Committee noted that there were three (3) vacancies and supported the nomination of Comrade Siphiwe Nyanda as well as forward two (2) additional named by 19 May 2018. 3.5 SAA Board The three {3) airlines are expected to be merged. The Deployment Committee will provide four (4) names to Comrade Pravin. The appointment of a full time CEO is in abeyance until the issue of the merge is concluded. A labour person is required on the board. The board must comply with EEA. Black newly qualified pilots to be employed by SAA as interns. 3.6 SAFCOL The board is to be replaced. The requirement is for 10 Non-Executive Directors. Comrade Pravin will provide six (6) names and the Deployment Committee will provide four (4) names. 3.7 Comrade Ayanda Dlodlo to provide a presentation at the next Deployment Committee. The next meeting of the Deployment Committee is on 21 May 2018 at 8am, Luthuli House 10th Floor Boardroom. 3IPage Matters Arising: In the meeting of 11 May 2018 the Deployment Committee agreed to forward names of people requesting for deployment to Comrade Pravin Gordhan for consideration in State Owned Enterprise Boards by 19 May 2018. On 18 May 2018 a list of abridged CV's and the full CV's were forwarded to Comrade Pravin Gordhan for consideration. 1. Denel Board The Deployment Committee agreed to forward two (2) names by 19 May 2018 for consideration on the Denel Board. The following people were appointed on the board: 1. Ms Monhla Hlala - Chairperson of the board 2. Mr Zoli Kunene 3. Prof Tshilidzi Marwala 4. General TT Matanzima 5. Ms Gloria Serobe 6. Ms Talib Sadiq 7. Ms Sue Rabkin 8. Dr Sibusiso Sibisi 9. Ms Cheryl Carolus { 10.Ms Nonzukiso Siyotula 11.Mr Thami Magazi 12.Mr Martin Mnisi 2. Transnet SOC Limited The Deployment committee and Comrade Pravin agreed that he chooses six (6) people and the Deployment Committee will forward six {6) nominations to him by Friday 19 May 2018. The Minister has appointed a new interim board, pending a full appointment, in consultation with Cabinet. The Interim board comprises of:    1. Mr. Popo Molefe as chairperson 2. Mr. Louis Zeuner 3. Ms. Ramasela Ganda 4. Ms. Ursula Fikelepi 5. Mr. Edward Kieswetter 6. Ms. Dimakatso Matshoga  DEPLOYMENT COMMITTEE 10th Floor Boardroom Luthuli House 03 AUGUST 2018 (9-12h00) 1. Welcome The Deputy President welcomed the members to the meeting. 2. Apologies · Cde Lindiwe Sisulu. · The Secretariat need to re-check the e-mail addresses and mobile numbers. 3. Minutes of the Previous Meeting The previous minutes were adopted, with the following amendments: · Transnet Board, Cde Sifiso Buthelezi recused himself. · All CVs were sent on Denel. Cde Simphiwe Nyanda was recommended to the Board of Denel, but he may have declined due to possible conflict of interests of his companies. · It was noted that a person may have been appointed to the Board of Sanparks. · There was a request for Cde Pravin Gordhan, Minister of Public Enterprises to present on the Transnet, Denel, SAA and SAFCOL. · Follow up should also be made with Cde Edna Molewa, Minister of Environment, Cde Ayanda Dlodlo, Minister of Public Services on the’state of the State’. 4. COGTA – Municipal Demarcation Board, Minister Zweli Mkhize The Minister presented on two matters under consideration, the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) and the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Rights Commission). The process is beginning therefore the purpose of the Minister attending was to alert the Deployment committee, so that the Committee could encourage the competent persons to apply. MDB is expected to conclude by 19 February 2019 and the CLR on 28 February 2019. The Minister requested for the Committee to take note that in terms of the MDB, a major challenge is that the Act is instructive, and many categories were pre- determined. The Committee were quite heartened by the initiative of the Minister to present to the Committee well in advance. The Committee was appreciative of this, and hoped that other Ministers would emulate him. 5. Science & Technology - Minister Kubayi-Ngubane Minister Kubayi-Ngubane presented on the National Advisory Council of Innovation, the National Space Council, and the National Research Foundation Board. The Minister apologised that her office has seemed to have sent documents only to the Deputy President and not the Deputy Secretary General. a) National Advisory Council of Innovation The approach has been to attract young people, especially women with an interest in the sciences. Advertisements have already been placed. It was advised by the Committee, that three form the previous Board is retained. Further noting that Cde Derek Swartz is firm supporter of the ANC. The view of the Committee was that attracting expertise should not be an excuse for the under- representation of women. Therefore the Committee resolved that the in the nine spaces that the Minister appoints, one of the men should be replaced by a woman. The Committee also recommended that the Minister should try to ensure geographic spread and a balance amongst the various universities. b) Space Agency It was noted that there were more than 14 people, and a serious need for persons with an engineering background. There was a challenge on racial representivity, although in this matter there with 9 females as opposed to 6 males. However there had been no applications from the so-called ‘Coloured’ community. c) National Research Foundation Board The meeting noted that no-one can be appointed who holds a political office. Nevertheless, there seems to be a good team with a number of people associated with the ANC movement. There are 7 females and 6 males 6. Trade and Industry - Director-General Lionel October The Committee agreed on the Re-appointment of the Deputy-Chair of the National Consumer Commission. However, the Deployment Committee preferred not to offer opinion on the other matters raised by the department on the Export Credit and Insurance Corporation and the Non-proliferation Council. The matters have been presented as a fait accompli and this is not the first time this particular department has done this. The Committee therefore resolved that the matters should be discussed with the Minister of Trade Industry and the Committee. The Minister should be invited to the next meeting of the Deployment Committee. 7. Transport – Chief of Staff of the Minister of Transport The Committee was sympathetic of the challenge facing the Minister, in that the terms of office of the many of the boards within his Ministerial envelope were coming to an end, and he was appointed just recently. It was agreed that the members must submit their proposalsm, and the abridged CVs must be submitted to the Minister. Furthermore, the Committee expected the Minister to meet with the Committee on the appointments to the Board. The Committee will provide the names of 3 persons plus the one woman. 8. Request for Deployment (Abridged CVs) This matter could not be discussed and was deferred to the next meeting. 9. Closure & Date of Next Meeting It was agreed that the Committee would re-convene next Monday, 06 August 2018, and the Minister of Public Service and Administration, Cde Ayanda Dlodlo, the Minister of Public Enterprises, Cde Pravin Gordhan, the Minister of Trade and Industry, Cde Rob Davies, and the Minister of Environment, Cde Edna Molewa, should be invited to present to the Committee. *** DEPLOYMENT COMMITTEE 10th Floor Boardroom Luthuli House 03 AUGUST 2018 (9-12h00) 1. Welcome The Deputy President opened and welcomed the members to the meeting. 2. Apologies · Cde Lindiwe Sisulu. · The Secretariat need to re-check the e-mail addresses and mobile numbers of members as some members did not receive the invites. 3. Minutes of the Previous Meeting The previous minutes were adopted, with the following amendments: · Transnet Board, Cde Sifiso Buthelezi recused himself. · All CVs were sent to Cde Pravin and they did not appear on the final list. · Cde Simphiwe Nyanda was recommended to the Board of Denel, but did not appear on the final list. · It was noted that a person may have been appointed to the Board of Sanparks. · There was a request for Cde Pravin Gordhan, Minister of Public Enterprises to present on the Transnet, Denel, SAA and SAFCOL. · Follow up should also be made with Cde Edna Molewa, Minister of Environment. · Cde Ayanda Dlodlo, Minister of Public Services to be invited to come and present on the’ Status of appointment of DG’s. 4. COGTA – Municipal Demarcation Board, Minister Zweli Mkhize The Minister presented on two matters under consideration, the Municipal Demarcation Board (MDB) and the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Rights Commission). The process is still at the beginning therefore the purpose of the Minister attending was to alert the Deployment committee, so that the Committee could encourage the competent persons to apply. MDB is expected to conclude by 19 February 2019 and the CLR on 28 February 2019. The current CLR Board performance must be evaluated. The Minister requested for the Committee to take note that in terms of the MDB, a major challenge is that the Act is instructive, and many categories were pre- determined. The Committee appreciated and commended the initiative of the Minister to present to the Committee well in advance and hoped that other Ministers would emulate him. 5. Science & Technology - Minister Kubayi-Ngubane Minister Kubayi-Ngubane presented on the National Advisory Council of Innovation, the National Space Council, and the National Research Foundation Board. a) National Advisory Council of Innovation The approach has been to attract young people, especially women with an interest in the sciences. Advertisements have already been placed. The Minister recommended that the 3 members to be retained from the previous Board. The recommendation also include 3 developing researchers who are Doctors. It was noted that Cde Derek Swartz is firm supporter of the ANC. The view of the Committee was that attracting expertise should not be an excuse for the under-representation of women and that there should be a balance. Therefore the Committee resolved that the in the nine spaces that the Minister appoints, one of the men should be replaced by a woman. The Committee also recommended that the Minister should try to ensure geographic spread and a balance amongst the various universities. b) Space Agency Ministry expected to appoint the maximum 14 people, and needed a persons with an engineering background. The recommendation has 9 females and 6 males. However there had been no applications from the so-called ‘Coloured’ community. The Committee recommended the appointment. c) National Research Foundation Board The meeting noted that no-one can be appointed who holds a political office. The committee was advised that one recommended member was married to a non-African. It was emphasise that this committee must drive transformation. Nevertheless, there seems to be a good team with a number of people associated with the ANC movement. The committee recommended the names for appointment. 6. Trade and Industry - Director-General Lionel October The Committee agreed on the Re-appointment of the Deputy-Chair of the National Consumer Commission. However, the Deployment Committee preferred not to offer opinion on the other matters raised by the department on the Export Credit and Insurance Corporation and the Non-proliferation Council. The matters have been presented as a fait accompli and this is not the first time this particular department has done this. The Committee therefore resolved that the matters should be discussed with the Minister of Trade Industry by the Committee. The Minister should be invited to the next meeting of the Deployment Committee. 7. Transport – Chief of Staff of the Minister of Transport ( Cde L Masuku ) The Committee was sympathetic of the challenge facing the Minister, in that the terms of office of the many of the boards within his Ministerial envelope were coming to an end, and he was appointed just recently. ACSA recommendations were accepted and the 3 names left for the committee. DSG was mandated to engage the Minister on the issue of Aviation. SANRAL recommendations were accepted with one name added by the Minister. DSG was mandated to add from the database 1 name. The committee resolve to request the Minister to come and present on the other processes to appoint Board members. It was agreed that the members must submit their proposals, and the abridged CVs must be submitted to the Minister. Tel: 27.11.376.1000 Website: www.anc.org.za 8. Request for Deployment (Abridged CVs) This matter could not be discussed and was deferred to the next meeting. 9. Closure & Date of Next Meeting It was agreed that the Committee would re-convene next Monday, 06 August 2018, and the Minister of Public Service and Administration, Cde Ayanda Dlodlo, the Minister of Public Enterprises, Cde Pravin Gordhan, the Minister of Trade and Industry, Cde Rob Davies, and the Minister of Environment, Cde Edna Molewa, should be invited to present to the Committee. DSG was mandated to engage with the Ministers to be invited. *** MINUTES OF THE DEPLOYMENT COMMITTEE 10th Floor Boardroom Luthuli House 26 NOVEMBER 2018 (10- h00) 1. Welcome Welcomed all, and apologised to all that we have not sat in a while for various reasons. 2. Apologies · Cde Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma · Cde Bheki not confirmed. · Cde Skhumbuzo Mpanza · Cde Jeff Radebe, the Deputy Minister will come in his place. · Minister Lindiwe Sisulu. 3. Minutes of Previous Meeting Minutes unanimously adopted without amendment. Record people who attended the meeting as well. 4. CSIR – 10:00 – 10:30 Minister Kubayi-Ngubane Finalising the board of CSIR, current term ends by December, and the new board will take over from January 2019. A pack has been prepared for briefing to the Deployment Committee. Noted the emphasis on age. As well as the concentration of appointments from Gauteng. Noted the need for a board of experts and advised that some of the candidates with academic qualifications be re-looked at, especially candidates with qualifications in artificial intelligence. It was further noted that the current candidate is actually internationally based making meeting attendance very difficult. Also advised that there is greater non-racial representivity in future boards. Cognisant that the CSIR is an industrial research agency and not general research. Moreover, though, Mr. Noge will be removed so that a white person with experience in the Oceans economy be placed. Will inform the DSG office on the change. 5. SASSA CEO 10:30 – 11:00 Minister Susan Shabangu Operating with an acting CEO since last year. Permission had been sought from the Deployment Committee to advertise. Requesting the Committee to grant permission for the final interviews of the short list of five (5) candidates to go ahead and the subsequent appointment. The Committee commended that she has approached the Committee on every step. The five are solely Black African. Advised to increase the interviews to seven people so as to include more national groups. Also cautioning that the advertisement making a preference, could be illegal. Apparently the advert was corrected. The water person, was the CFO and now that department is in the red, candidate number one discouraged. Investigate why the one candidate not employed. 6. Nuclear Energy Board 11:00 – 11:30 Minister Jeff Radebe – Deputy Minister Will return with the short list and not just the nominated individuals. Dr. Manqoba Nene. Percentage of young people. Note that Ms. Masango is a member of the CSIR board as well, but that is not incorrect. 7. IDC 11:30 – 12:00 Minister Ebrahim Patel CEO position of the IDC. There is the wider issue of the IDC board at another time, not today. The IDC is the main DFI for industrial funding, as a funder and a co-funder. It doesn’t receive money from the state, but it’s model is based on profit and then re- invest it to produce Black industrialists, young, women and rural areas. The short list has already been done, and the interviews have been conducted. In the light of that the Minister was advised to cast the net wider, and provide the long list so that a short list can be jointly arrived upon. Monday, 3 December to meet again and finalise the matter, and Thursday or Friday (29 and 30 November 2018) will expand interviewed. 8. DIRCO 12:00 – 12:30 Minister Lindiwe Sisulu Deferred to the next meeting. Noting that she is a member of the Deployment Committee, but we acknowledge her hectic schedule. The DSG will take the presentation and it will be circulated. Need to look at the grading of the embassies. Next committee meeting will look at the grading based on DIRCO’s explanations. 9. Request for Deployment (Abridged CVs) 12:30 – 13:00 Advertising the National Development Agency and DDG corporate services and Disaster Management Fund 10. Closure 13:00 Treat everyone very fairly and consistently and help both government and the organisation.