Statement on article by Minister of Tourism Ms Lindiwe Sisulu 20 January 2022 - 6:45pm President Cyril Ramaphosa met with the Minister of Tourism, Ms Lindiwe Sisulu, in Cape Town earlier this week, where he admonished her about her recent article entitled “Hi Mzansi, have we seen justice?” published on 7 January 2022. The President specifically admonished the Minister about her attack on the judiciary when she said: “Today, in the high echelons of our judicial system are those mentally colonised Africans, who have settled with the worldview and mindset of those who have dispossessed their ancestors. “They are only too happy to lick the spittle of those who falsely claim superiority. “The lack of confidence that permeates their rulings against their own speaks very loudly, while others, secure in their agenda, clap behind closed doors.” Minister Sisulu conceded that her words were inappropriate. Minister Sisulu retracts this statement and affirms her support for the judiciary. “I accept that my column has levelled against the judiciary and African judges in particular unsubstantiated, gratuitous and deeply hurtful comments,” said Minister Sisulu. “I retract unequivocally my hurtful comments. I recognise that many women and men judges past and present have served their country in the judiciary with dedication and patriotism and some have made sterling sacrifices in the fight against apartheid and colonialism. “I apologise for and regret the hurt I have caused the judiciary.” Statement issued by the Presidency, 20 January 2022 *** Statement issued in response by Lindiwe Sisulu: Pretoria To all Media Houses I have just been informed of a media alert issued by the Presiden cy that apparently claims that I Lindiwe N. Sisulu retracted my original expression. I wish to categorically disown this statement in its entirety as a misrepresentation of the said meeting I had with the president. The president and I met on Wednesday at 9 pm at his house. In such a meeting, he shared his challenge with one aspect of the article on the judges. The president proposed an intermediary that would focus on the one line about the judges to resolve that. I awaited such to be communicated which would do nothing to the entire article. Under no circumstances did I commit to any retraction or apology since I stand by what I penned. The content of the president's statement in its current form is un-fortunate as it is not what we agreed on. In this regard, I wish to distance myself from such. I will in the next 24 hours issue a full statement. Lindiwe N. Sisulu Response by the Presidency: PRESIDENCY STANDS BY STATEMENT ON MINISTER OF TOURISMThe Presidency stands by its statement earlier this evening, 20 January 2022, on a discussion between President @CyrilRamaphosa and Minister of Tourism Ms Lindiwe Sisulu.