Update on preliminary assessment by DPWI professional engineering team | parliament fire 7 January 2021 In consultation with the HAWKS, an internal DPWI professional team comprising of highly skilled Structural, Civil, Electrical, and Mechanical engineers have conducted and concluded a high level preliminary visual assessment of the damages including the safety aspect of the site due to the recent fire at Parliament. The team arrived in Cape Town on Monday morning 3 January 2022. Parliament and SAPS provided access to the Engineers this week for the inside walk inspection of the Old and New Assembly. Unfortunately due to the high temperatures in the building on Monday 3 January 2022 and the flare up on the side of the National Assembly around 17h00 which continued right through the night, the professional team could only commence with their assessment late Tuesday 4 January 2022 afternoon. The professional team’s visual assessment started with the Old National Assembly and then proceeded to assess the structural damages on the New National Assembly. On the basis of the preliminary visual inspections, there is evidence of severe structural damage (Major Spalling) to the slabs. The slabs affected by the damage are the 2nd, 3rd and 4th floor. In addition to the above there are major cracks in the walls on the 2nd and 3rd floor. The professional team recommended that the New Assembly Building is unsafe, should be cordoned off and closed with immediate effect in order to restrict access. The Department has activated appropriate steps for the procurement of an independent specialist engineering team to conduct further detailed assessments and testing of material strength. National Treasury has agreed to expedite the process to procure the independent specialist engineering team as expeditiously as possible. The preliminary visual assessment report and photos have been handed over to the HAWKS and we are not allowed to share it because it is part of the evidence from a crime scene. Statement issued by Roger Solomons, Chief of Staff | Minister Patricia de Lille, 7 January 2022