SAMWU concerned for workers’ safety following brutal killing of 5 workers at a Pikitup Depo 12 January 2022 The South African Municipal Workers’ Union (SAMWU) in Gauteng Province is saddened and shocked to learn of the brutal killing of 5 workers at the Pikitup Swartkoppie Deport in Develand, South of Johannesburg. On Tuesday, 11 January 2022, a group of unknown men stormed the deport and shot 7 security guards, four of the workers died at the scene, while the fifth succumbed to gun shot wounds today, two are currently still in hospital. Firstly we would like to send our sincere condolences to the families of the deceased and further wish  speedy recovery to the two workers. At this point in time, the circumstances leading to the shooting are not known, all the workers were not robbed of their personal belongings nor has the City’s property been stolen. As SAMWU, we are concerned that workers who are supposed to protect the City’s infrastructure are they themselves left vulnerable to attacks. To make matters worse, these workers are not provided with weapons to defend themselves and the City’s property. We are therefore concerned for the safety of hundreds of security guards throughout  the City who on a daily basis ensure that the City’s property is protected. We urge law enforcement authorities to ensure that they leave no stone unturned as they hunt and bring to justice the perpetrators of such evil deeds which have robbed five families of a bread winner and many children without a parent. We further urge community members in and around Develand to work together with law enforcement authorities to ensure that these criminals are brought to book. These people live amongst us, someone ought to know what they have done and as such we plead with community members to assist in the apprehension of these monsters. We once more send our sincere condolences to the families and the entire Pikitup workforce. We also call on the City to, in line with  the Occupational Health and Safety Act ensure the safety of all workers within the City while they are in the workplace. Issued by Bafana Zungu, Provincial Secretary, SAMWU Gauteng Province, 13 January 2022