ANC statement of the NEC and NEC Lekgotla held on 20-23 January 2022 29 January 2022 The National Executive Committee of the ANC held its planning meetings in virtual sessions from 20-23 January 2022. The regular NEC meeting which took place from 20-21 January 2021 and the NEC Lekgotla from 22-23 January 2022, deliberated on plans for the year, based on the pressing national issues and priorities set out in the ANC January 8 Statement. The Lekgotla brings together the political and governance leadership, its Alliance partners COSATU and SACP and the Leagues, to assess the ANC government's performance against agreed policies and targets. A Challenging National and Global Context as 2022 Unfolds The NEC and Lekgotla acknowledged the extent to which the global Covid 19 pandemic has exacerbated national fault-lines of unemployment, poverty and inequality. Since the beginning of 2020, more than 93,000 South Africans lost their lives to the pandemic, and the NEC extend our condolences to their families and loved ones. The pandemic exacerbated an already precarious economic situation, with significant decline in GDP, job losses and the country in deep recession. This has led to increasing levels of vulnerability including extreme poverty and hunger, with the poorest bearing the largest impact. Unemployment is at its highest ever levels, with latest Quarterly Labour Force Survey putting the unemployment rate at nearly 35%. Youth unemployment is particularly concerning at 66, 5% for youth between 15-24% and 43, 8% for youth between 25-34 years. Unemployment is therefore deeply structural, hovering above 20% since 1996. The NEC welcomed the improvements recorded in 2021 Matric results, with the increase in learners qualifying with a Bachelor's pass. We must remain resolute to ensure improvements in the quality and relevance of education, and together as a society address the root causes of the large number of learners (around 1 million) who drop out of school before completing Grade 12. The NEC further noted that of the around 10 million people receiving the R350 Covid 19 grant, a significant portion have not completed Matric and many have never held a job before, including people in their 40s and 50s. Twenty-seven years since the democratic breakthrough of 1994, the race, gender, and spatial development dimensions of inequality, poverty and unemployment, continues to reflect the persisting legacy of apartheid colonialism and patriarchy. This legacy also finds expression in a myriad of other social challenges, such as the scourge of gender based violence and femicide, crime, lawlessness and social instability, teenage parenthood and substance abuse, which erodes the social fabric of communities and undermines social cohesion. Progress in addressing the challenges facing our country has been delayed significantly by corruption and state capture, as elaborated in the first part of the report of the Commission on State Capture released at the beginning of this year. Corruption not only undermines development and investment in infrastructure and basic services, but also fundamentally damages trust in our democratic institutions and processes. We therefore have to face the challenge of rebuilding and strengthening the institutions of the democratic state after years of state capture, in the face of resistance from those who benefitted from state capture. All these issues face the nation at a time when the African National Congress as an organisation is beset by severe challenges, with weak organisation, internal conflicts, factionalism and individual self-interest. The ANC's brand as a servant of the people and leader of society has been severely battered. The NEC made an in depth analysis of the Local government elections results and the implications for the movement, with inputs from the Mapungubwe Institute for Strategic Reflections (MISTRA) and the ANC's National Elections Team. Although the ANC remains the largest party in the country in terms of popular support and number of municipalities where it received an outright majority, for the first time since 1994, the ANC garnered less than 50% national support in an election. In the words of President Cyril Ramaphosa to the NEC Lekgotla: 'The people expressed their dissatisfaction with the organisation and this government by staying away in large numbers and not voting for the ANC." The ANC will therefore have to get serious about renewal, in the organisation as well as with regards to governance. NEC AND LEKGOTLA DECISIONS It was against this background that the NEC and Lekgotla took the following decisions: A. On Building a social compact to decisively address unemployment and poverty and improve basic services to all, the Lekgotla: Reiterated the importance of urgently cementing the social compact in order to address unemployment and poverty. Social compacting needs to happen at all levels and in all sectors, with trade-offs in the interest of national development for the betterment of all. The Lekgotla received an update on the progress made in NEDLAC, and note that government will urgently consult with social partners individually, to iron out critical aspects of such a compact. An Alliance committee will be established to ensure greater consensus on the approach towards a national social compact. Reaffirmed that economic recovery efforts to simulate growth, investment and employment creation must now be accelerated. Fundamental to this is increased funding for urgent programmes to improve basic services, such as, access to water, electricity, roads and bridges for communities both in urban and rural areas. Lekgotla called on government to establish a Special Service Delivery cluster, or other appropriate institutional arrangement, to drive and monitor improved overall service delivery in areas such as housing, water and sanitation, in direct response to community concerns about the poor state of critical infrastructure across a number of municipalities. Noted that the R350 Covid Social Relief of Distress grant has had a significant positive impact on the lives of the poor, particularly the unemployed, and urged government to examine the feasibility and affordability of continuing with the provision of some form of income support for the poor and unemployed. Resolved that Community service programmes and community gardens should be encouraged through institutions such as ward committees, civics, youth women's groups, and churches, and that with regard to the township economy and community projects, government must promote economic activity through the provision of sites, access to markets, improved regulation and infrastructure, information on opportunities, financing and incentives for local procurement. It further agreed on the need for labour intensive interventions to build and maintain community infrastructure , and for the creation of mass employment opportunities, particularly for young people. Agreed that for South Africa to overcome the crippling impact of electricity shortage and loadshedding, the country must embark decisively on a Just Energy Transition to restore energy security and through the Integrated Resources Plan (IRP), mobilise investment, and continue to pursue an energy mix which includes renewables, battery and pump storage, gas as a transition enabler, nuclear at a pace our country can afford, as well as explore carbon capture and use other technologies. The ANC and Alliance partners should provide leadership to the country's transition to a low carbon economy and climate resilient future. B. On Fundamental renewal and rebuilding of the ANC as effective and trusted agent for change The NEC in its regular session noted that the call for the renewal of the ANC, as it engages on its mission to rid the country of the legacies of apartheid colonialism and patriarchy and battles the sins of incumbency after the breakthrough of 1994, has been a consistent echo since the 50th National Conference, and all subsequent National Conferences. The current NEC was elected on an explicit mandate to drive a consistent programme for the renewal and unity of the ANC, restore the relationship between the ANC and the people, its integrity and role as agent for change and leader in society. The NEC accepted that we are on a downward spiral, and that unless we renew and rebuild the organisation, we will fail in our mission to fundamentally and radically transform society and build a better life for all. It recognized that decisive and different actions are needed in every pillar of our programme, by all leaders, members, public representatives, deployees and structures, and not just lofty pronouncements. 8) The NEC reiterated that Renewal in this context therefore means, amongst others: Modernising its internal systems and practices as well as ridding it of practices that disregard or distort organisational practices, ethos and discipline. We must be an organisation whose existence is based on values of integrity, honesty and discipline. Enhancing the understanding of our history, values and practices amongst both the membership and broader society. Strengthening the ANC's ability to influence society and making sure its progressive and developmental values, actions and practices become more hegemonic. As we undertake the immediate and pressing tasks of renewal and rebuilding, we also look beyond our current challenges towards the future. 9) The NEC therefore took the following approach on urgent Organisational Renewal tasks for 2022: Turn all our work outwards to serve and focus on the people, engage with them and increase participation and ownership of our programmes in government and communities. Address the erosion of our principles of non-racialism and non-sexism, and attend to these issues in a concrete and systematic manner. This must form part of a broader programme of political education to ensure our membership espouses and lives the organisation's progressive values. Strengthening non-sexism should not just be the responsibility of the ANCWL or women alone, this is an organisation-wide responsibility. Actively build cohesion and action to achieve a non-racial and non-sexist society and to combat tribalism and narrow nationalism. Actively engage with people on problems and conflicts on the ground and become again the leader of society through our work with the people and consistent engagement. Win back the confidence of key organisations that mobilise the motive forces and sectors of society in every municipality and ward. Build a coherent programme of action in this year towards conference that focuses on building cadres, proper structures and real interaction with the people — just a few programmes with clear indicators and intervention where failing, include Leagues and Alliance wherever appropriate. Deal with outstanding issues of candidate and mayoral disputes, discipline and integrity and strengthen ANC disciplinary structures. Respond positively and change our behaviour where the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into State Capture led by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo has made recommendations Set up a permanent election capacity with a budget and strategic, message, research, by-election, monitoring and training capacity , backed up by a call centre that monitors implementation of municipal plans and ANC programmes. Set up a team of ANC election experts and leaders that can deploy a rescue mission to every region or sub-region where we lost significant votes in the last 3 elections, and engage with all structures on the elections analysis reports. I) Complete the Organisational design project and budget and urgently address staff issues within the law and our own strategic priorities. The NEC furthermore decided: 10) On the broad approach to the operationalization of the Renewal Commission announced in the January 8 statement, to provide sharper focus to the immediate process towards renewal and rebuilding of the movement, and to develop a roadmap for the movement towards its 120th anniversary in 2032. The Officials will, as directed by the NEC, propose names for the Commission to the next NWC meeting. 11) To focus on the rebuilding of the ANC branch as a centre of development and participation in communities. 12) To ensure that our structures, public representatives and deployees in government urgently: Focus on sorting out water, sewage, power, roads as a matter of urgency and get all spheres of government to act now — prioritise, coordinate and deliver with clear timeframes and outcomes in every municipality. Make sure we employ capable and competent and qualified managers to deliver in municipalities and key departments. Develop a list of what will be fixed this year with timeframes and budgets and hold all to account for this Train all ANC councillors and mayors and MMC in what the ANC expects from them, monitor their plans and their performance and intervene immediately where there are problems. Set up Local government Forum and produce quarterly Local Government Barometer. Make sure our economic strategies and plans are clear and focus on investment, growth and improving employment for youth and the unemployed Use or capable and ethical developmental state to lead all sectors of society in a common programme to build our economy, improve basic services for all and increase the social safety net for the poor and unemployed. Develop a coherent, progressive and effective approach to immigration and undocumented migrants 13) To Strengthen our communications and engagement in the battle of ideas by ensuring: A clear ANC response to our losses and the lack of confidence of the people. A clear message on what we will do differently to regain status as leader of society, need actions more than words. Strong focus on commitment to clean up corruption and deliver services — action not just words, limit contradictory messages from leaders and act fast when it occurs. Ongoing research and message development to guide our communications and action. Improve human capacity and have briefing notes on every current and ongoing issue. Work closely with Alliance and MDM and build coherence around our core goals and programmes in the battle of ideas. Encourage society and all motive forces and communities to engage in the key policy issues towards Conference. 14) To develop a specific plan of action to address the promises we made to address organisational challenges at local level, and attend to manipulation of list processes during the 2021 Local Government Elections, complete the disputes process led by the Electoral Committee and immediately go back to the people to act to correct where wrongs were done. 15) NEC urged the Officials to remain seized with the matter of placing the ANC finances on a sound footing. The NEC note the work being done on a new Organisational design for ANC offices, that is appropriate to its mission and affordable. 16) In order to improve ANC discipline around political positions, contestation and contradictions between leaders and structures, the NEC resolved that all leadership collectives must act swiftly on ill-discipline, criminality and corruption in our movement, without fear or favour, and strengthen and revamp the ANC disciplinary structures at all levels accordingly 17) The NEC adopted the Roadmap and timelines towards 55th National Conference, appointed the National Conference Preparatory Committee and furthermore: Mandated the Electoral Committee, chaired by Cde Kgalema Motlanthe to develop rules for contesting ANC leadership positions in line with Rule 14 of the ANC Constitution, so that we start now to safeguard election of our structures from capture by money, criminals or factions; to ensure these contests happen in a disciplined and democratic manner. Resolve to support and monitor regional, provincial conferences and League conferences due this year, so that they are in line with the renewal, unity, the people-first agenda, and minimise conflict, division and anti-renewal practices in the run-up to the electoral conferences in all structures and Leagues. 18) To continue to strengthen the Alliance, its ideological and programmatic cohesion and unity in action, and note that all three Alliance partners — the ANC, COSATU and the SACP will have their landmark national conferences this year. Commit to work together at all levels to implement the apex tasks set out in January 8 statement. 19) The NEC welcomed the first part of the report of the Commission on State capture, and established a task team to process the ANC's comprehensive response to the Commission on State Capture, including recommendations from the Reports relating to the ANC and its deployees; referrals to NEC Sub-Committees for processing of proposed policies, legislative amendments, structures, etc; matters to be referred to the Renewal Commission and the Integrity Commission; and prepare a discussion paper for ANC structures on Corruption and State Capture. C. On Defending the gains of the Revolution, 20) Lekgotla recognised that the ANC is going through a period of decay and degeneration; but that the ANC during its 110 years of existence has been able to extricate itself from similar situations in the past. Acknowledged that threats to our democratic gains is also a result of an era of loss of moral and ethical principles within the broader movement, and that divisions and factions in the ANC may become a threat to our democracy. 21) The ANC and Lekgotla reaffirm our support for the Constitution, the Bill of Rights and the judiciary and distance ourselves from narratives that seek to negate its transformative intent and gains. 22) The ANC reaffirmed its principled support for the objectives and work of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into State Capture since its inception. 23) Lekgotla noted that whilst government will only pronounce fully on receipt of the complete Report, urged government to fully address the behaviour and causes that allowed state capture to occur. 24) Lekgotla agreed that the ANC will need to lead the debate on immigration to ensure that it remains infused with principles of Pan-Africanism and does not pander to right-wing sentiments. It believe that promoting legal migration is a central aspect of peace and security of South Africa and the sub-region and the ANC must act against the stoking of anti-African sentiment. 25) The Pan-Africanism philosophy dates back from the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) led by Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana (now African Union) on 25 May 1963, with its aims, inter alia, to safeguard the interests of African states and independence of all African states. The role played by Zambia in hosting liberation movements from Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Namibia and South Africa was in furtherance of the Pan - Africanism philosophy. Pan-Africanism is about unity and humanitarianism espoused by the founding mothers and fathers of Africa, which is still relevant today. 26) Lekgotla welcomed the call by the South African Council of Churches (SACC) for a national dialogue with all stakeholders on the matter. D. Building a capable and ethical developmental state 27) Lekgotla affirmed that as an Alliance, we seek to build a capable and ethical developmental state, which is fundamental to our common programme for the reconstruction, growth and transformation of society and the economy. 28) The Lekgotla highlighted that there must be increased scrutiny of the performance of ANC public representatives and government and agreed that the movement will increase its monitoring and evaluation capacity. 29) In recognition of the ongoing drive to professionalise the public service, the Lekgotla recommended the urgent finalisation of the professionalisation framework with an emphasis on pre-entry, recruitment, selection, induction, continuous learning and career progression of public servants, and strengthening the National School of Government. 30) Lekgotla recognised and recommended conducting government and society wide research and discussions on the future of work to take account of changing attitudes and modalities of work, that is influenced by digitalisation and technological advances. 31) Lekgotla urged Government to finalise the legislative amendments aimed at the realisation of the single public service to ensure equitable and relevant spread of skills throughout the public service. E. On Building a better Africa and World 32) The Lekgotla reiterated that our commitment to a better Africa and a better world remains unwavering, as we participate in the resolution of issues affecting global humanity, including the urgent challenges of climate change, global peace, security and development, the reform of multilateral institutions and as we continue to pledge solidarity with oppressed peoples elsewhere. This should inform the work of govemment and the programme of the ANC and the Alliance. 33) The Lekgotla noted with concern the growth of right-wing ideology, and its adverse impact in international politics and the African continent, posing a serious risk to the global South, undermines global solidarity efforts and gives rise to imposition of unilateralism in the international system. Recently, we have witnessed political parties in South Africa running their campaigns on anti-immigration ticket. Lekgotla implored the ANC government to continue to mobilise progressive forces on the continent and globally to advance a progressive international agenda. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 29 January 2022