ActionSA Concludes Plans to be 2nd Biggest Party in 2024 13 February 2022 ActionSA’s Interim Senate has concluded a three-day strategic planning process that has resolved that the party must emerge from the 2024 national and provincial election as the 2nd biggest party in South Africa only behind the ANC. The Senate, ActionSA’s highest decision-making body, grappled with matters about South Africa’s trajectory and how the party can build upon its 2021 local government election success, and build on its achievements as a party attracting grass roots support from all communities across South Africa. In particular, the Senate resolved that: President Ramaphosa’s SONA was yet another leadership failure in a long line of failures exhibited by the President. It formed a stark reminder to our strategic planning processes of the responsibility that lies with ActionSA. The success of our election results in 2021 be attributed fully to the volunteers of ActionSA who worked tirelessly to build our party, without the publicly funded resources that other political parties benefit from. ActionSA must emerge from the 2024 national and provincial elections as the 2nd biggest party in South Africa and in a position to lead a multi-party alternative to the ANC. We must continue to build a true non-racial home for all South Africans and must continue to demonstrate the diversity of our country. A governance unit be established and capacitated in the Party under the leadership of Dr Nasiphi Moya, the purpose of which would be the training and performance management of our councillors and the strategic support to our MMCs. Our structures be urgently capacitated in the 9 provinces with all Provincial Chairpersons and structures to be tasked with establishing wall-to-wall branches. Furthermore, the national leadership of the Party to embark upon a national tour over the next few months. A full-scale public policy process be initiated which would call upon all relevant public and private sectors as well as civil society leaders to come together to develop a new policy alternative in South Africa. This process will focus on the critical policy areas which have been abandoned by political parties. The ActionSA Political Academy be established to ensure that every member joining ActionSA is familiarised about our values, our policies, our leadership model as well as our organisational culture. To that end, the strategic planning process culminated in the development of our overall strategic framework for 2022. Importantly, what emerged is that 2022 must be the year of growth and momentum. The demonstration of this growth and momentum must arise from the continued effort to attract high-profile South Africans with demonstrable grass-roots activism, leadership track record, and an unwavering commitment to rebuilding South Africa as well as our strategic contestation of by-elections, many of whom are lining-up to join our organisation. The calibre, diversity and experience of ActionSA’s Senate has proven to be an essential factor in the success of the strategic planning process. We are blessed to have individuals who offer excellent insights and leadership to the critical responsibility that lies with ActionSA. I am delighted by the outcome of this process and confident that ActionSA is on track to be the political alternative that South Africans are desperate for. Statement issued by Herman Mashaba, ActionSA President, 13 February 2022