Premier David Makhura on remedial work at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital 17 February 2022 Premier David Makhura has signed a proclamation to transfer all functions relating to the refurbishments at Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital (CMJAH) from the Gauteng Department of Infrastructure Development (GDID) to the Department of Health. Premier Makhura’s decision was made to fast-track the implementation of all remedial work to restore full services at the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital following the fire outbreak at the hospital on 16 April 2021, which caused extensive structural damage. In May 2021, remedial works commenced on the Radiation Oncology building, which was not affected by the fire and by the end of June 2021, the remedial works in this building were completed, allowing for the reopening of the building. Sections of the hospital unaffected by the fire were reopened, including over 400 hospital beds to address the rising numbers of COVID-19 infections in Gauteng, relieving pressure from the other facilities. In October 2021, the Solidarity Fund and SPIRE Fund offered donations to the value of R68 million for the refurbishment of the Accident and Emergency Section and other wards in the affected block. The first phase of the project will be completed at the end of February 2022 and the Accident and Emergency Section will be handed over to clinicians for resumption of services. There were delays in the implementation of the full project to restore services at the hospital owing to disagreements between the Department of Infrastructure Development and the Department of Health on the scope of the project and budget. Premier David Makhura, having been deeply concerned by the delays in the implementation of the remedial work to restore full services at the hospital, instructed the Acting Director General in the Office of the Premier to explore all options within the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) and Treasury regulations to fast-track the project. On 9 February 2022, the proclamation by Premier Makhura was published in the Government Gazette effectively transferring the functions entrusted by Section 1 of the Government Immovable Asset Management Act, 2007 (Act No 19 of 2007) in so far as it relates to the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital from the Department of Infrastructure Development to the Department of Health. The transfer of functions made it possible for the National Department of Health, at the request of the Gauteng Department of Health to appoint the Development Bank of Southern Africa (DBSA) as the implementing agent for the remedial work at the Charlotte Maxeke Johannesburg Academic Hospital. Premier David Makhura and the Minister of Health, Dr Joe Phaahla will receive regular reports on the project. Issued by Vuyo Mhaga, Spokesperson to the Gauteng Premier David Makhura, 17 February 2022