Speaking notes delivered by Police Minister General Bheki Cele at the occasion of the release of the quarter three crime statistics 2021/2022  18 February 2022 National Commissioner of the SAPS; General Kehla Sitole;National Head of DPCI Dr/Adv Lt General LebeyaDeputy National Commissioners;Provincial Commissioners and Divisional Commissioners;Acting Secretary of Police; Mr Takalani RamaruSenior SAPS Officers;Heads of Entities;All Heads of Department;Members of the Media Good Afternoon This afternoon, the country will get a glimpse of the police recorded crime statistics for the third quarter of the 2021/2022, covering the period 1st October to 31st December 2021. It is during this time that the SAPS in all provinces put in place their unique Safer Festive Season operational plans.  These plans ensured that crime was kept to a minimal by doubling up efforts to safeguard the security of the republic. It is also public knowledge that during the Festive Season, criminals tend to use this time of festivities to target members of the public for their criminal gains. Certainly the Festive Season used to be characterized as a “Free For All” for criminals with the increase of contact crimes and commercial crimes. However, this is not the case this time around. The National Crime Statistics of the three months of reporting show significant reductions in the number of crimes committed and reported to the SAPS. We have recorded significant decreases in most of the crime categories. Crimes such as: Common Robbery; Sexual Assault; Attempted Sexual Offences and Contact Sexual Offences, have recorded three to four digit decreases. Except for Murder, which remains worryingly stubborn. MURDER In the three months of reporting, an 8.9% increase in murder was recorded. 562 more people were killed in South Africa between October and December compared to the same period in 2020. Out of the 6 859 people killed in the country, 902 of them were women and 352 where children. 232 of the overall murders were as a result of domestic violence. 27 SAPS officers, were killed on and off duty, during this time. The North West province recorded the highest increase of murder cases, up by 24.3% when compared to the corresponding period in the previous financial year. Fewer people were killed in the Free State and Western Cape provinces, in the last three months of 2021. Both of these provinces recorded decreases in their murder figures. A double digit (21.1%) decline in murder cases was recorded in the Free State and this is most welcomed. While all provinces are unique in their crime patterns and policing approach, As the Ministry we urge provincial management of the SAPS to self-reflect and sharpen some of their approaches when dealing with contact crimes. CAUSES OF MURDER The top four causative factors of these deaths are arguments, vigilantism, robberies and revenge or retaliation. A total of 2 599 people were murdered in public places such as an open field, street, parking areas and abandoned buildings. The second most likely place for murder to occur is at the home of the victim or of the perpetrator. Liquor outlets were the third most likely place to be killed in South Africa. Some of the increases in murder are attributable to multiple murders where a number of people are killed in one incident. Overall contact crimes committed against a person decreased by 4.0% RAPE A 9.0% decrease has been recorded for Sexual offences Despite this drop, 11 315 people were raped between October and December 2021. This is a decrease of 903 rape cases, compared to the previous reporting period. All nine provinces recorded decreases in rape cases. Over 5 012 of the rape incidents took place at the home of the victim or the home of the rapist. 674 rapes were domestic violence related and 632 of rape cases in this category, involved female victims and 42 were males. The Eastern Cape’s Lusikisiki police station and Umlazi and Inanda station in KwaZulu-Natal recorded the highest incidents of rape. The decrease in some of the sexual offences, especially rape cases can be attributed to all provinces increasing their GBV awareness campaigns. This includes contact meetings with SAPS and communities. The service has also ramped up its communication and sensitisation on GBVF crimes through print, television and radio mediums. The publication of convictions in all provinces has increased which serves as a deterrent to perpetrators. The implementation of the National Strategic Plan on GBVF by various Government stakeholders, gaining ground and there is increased synergy by all departments in prioritising this crime. Commissioner, more can and SHOULD be done in this regard. GBV Members of the Media, Let me remind the nation that GBV and Femicide remains a priority crime for the SAPS. I again call on all SAPS members to continue to improve their responses and service delivery to victims and survivors of GBVF at station level. Dedicated GBV desks are now available at 381 police stations across the country. The establishment of the GBV Desks will be finalized at the end of March this year. 91 489 police officers have been trained in Victim Empowerment, Domestic Violence, Sexual Offences related programs. This will ensure Victim-Centered service is provided by officers at police stations. Focused policing has become our biggest arsenal for the SAPS, against this scourge. Through, our 185 FCS units, including 9 Serial Electronic Crime Investigation units (SECI), detectives are solely focusing their efforts and expertise in investigating crimes against women and children. The FCS has handed down 272 life sentences for crimes committed against women and children, since April to date. SERIAL RAPISTS Some of these sentences include the convictions of serial rapists who have been rightfully handed down heavy sentences. Sergeant Livhuwani Ramathavhana attached to SAPS’s FCS Unit in Gauteng, led an investigation that resulted in a Gauteng serial rapist being sentenced to 16 life imprisonment terms. Tebogo Matjeke was also handed down an additional 150 years for several cases of kidnapping and robbery. Police in the Free State have arrested a serial rapist, who has been accused of the rape of 13 women. These crimes took place between 2009 and 2013. In Gauteng, 23 year old Professor Meli, was convicted to life imprisonment for six counts of rape, kidnapping and robbery. The serial rapist was arrested for targeting a woman in Evaton in Gauteng assaulting her before raping her. While in prison his DNA sample was taken and through our Forensic Science Laboratories, he was traced to several other rape cases in the Evaton area. Another arrest as a result of DNA analysis, has resulted in Soweto born Oupa Morgan, linked to seven rape cases. Between 2014 and 2018, the serial rapist broke into his victims homes, threatened them with a firearm or knife before raping them, he proceeded to rob them of their personal belongings. Morgan was in June 2021 sentenced to 11 life sentences. In KwaZulu- Natal, 25 year-old Tumelo Khiba was in November 2020, sentenced to life for the rape of seven women in Pinetown. In the same province, a 50 year-old man accused is before the courts for the alleged rape of 22 women. The accused was arrested in January for crimes that occurred in the Durban CBD, dating back to 2008. Ladies and Gentlemen, These are some of the cases I needed to highlight to demonstrate the importance of the removal of serial rapists in society. Arresting one rapist saves multiple women from this violent crime that has no place in our society. More of these arrests will ensure decreased rape incidents in public places, which is the second most likely place of occurrence for rape incidents. I really hope these jail terms also reassure victims of GBV crimes, that the synergy from law enforcement working better with prosecution is yielding encouraging results. These statistics also show that many sexual assaults such as rape, happen behind closed doors among people who are known to each other. We therefore, also call on communities to be more proactive in the prevention of this crime that is often difficult to police. On the same token, we welcome the three new pieces of legislation signed in January, aimed at strengthening efforts to end GBV. The amendment of the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, the Criminal and Related Matters Amendment Act, and the Domestic Violence Amendment Act will surely strengthen not only the country, but the SAPS’s responses to GBVF. The Domestic Violence Amendment Act progressively introduces online applications for protection order against acts of domestic violence. We are encouraged that the Acts will ensure a victim-centered focus and make it more difficult for perpetrators to escape justice. These legislations will amongst many interventions, tighten bail and usher in minimum sentencing provisions for GBVF accused persons. FARM ATTACKS In the farming community, 11 people were killed in11 incidents of murder, which occurred in farms and small-holdings. Three of these murders were either farm dwellers/workers or passerby’s who were reported to have been murdered as a result of an attack by the farm owner or farm manager. PROPERTY RELATED CRIMES There was some good news for those who owned property and livestock. All Property Related crimes decreased by 7.7% and the Mpumalanga province recorded a double-digit decline of 15,2% Burglary at residential and non-residential premises declined drastically. Theft of vehicles and motorcycles also declined by over 20% A total of 7 404 cases of stock theft were opened. This crime declined by 450 cases, compared to the corresponding period in the previous financial year. Arson cases have increased over this period of reporting, with 963 cases reported from October to December. Contrary to some perceptions, that arson has increased following the torching of Parliament in January this year. These statistics show that the crime of arson has been prevalent and fuelled by various reasons including domestic conflict. ASSAULT Assault GBH figures have shown drastic decreases, with over 3 thousand (3611) less cases reported during this reporting period. While the decrease is welcomed, the number of assault cases is still too high and shows that violence still stalks many communities and is often fueled by alcohol abuse. 46 513 cases of assault GBH and 47 081 cases of common assault were opened with the police in the three months of reporting. Arguments, road rage, intervention in a fight and robbery are some of the leading causes of the assault GBH. Out of the 46 513 cases of assault GBH, 2 048 where children under 17 years. TRIO CRIMES Aggravated robberies such as Carjacking increased by 13.8% There were 661 more carjacking cases in the period of October to December 2021. Robberies at residential premises dipped by 0.4% and robberies at nonresidential premises increased by 86 more cases. Resulting in 5138 of such cases reported to the police. Cash-In-Transit heists also decreased during this reporting period. There were five less cash vans targeted by criminals, compared to the previous reporting period. Gauteng, which is the province where this crime is most prevalent, has recorded the largest decrease of 9 less cases. The observed decreases in CIT robberies in Gauteng, Mpumalanga and Western Cape are attributable to the specialized CIT Task Teams established countrywide to infiltrate and take down these well-organized and sophisticated criminals gangs. KIDNAPPING 2 605 kidnaping cases were opened with the police. This crime trend has shown a decrease in only two provinces and the leading motive for this crime is high-jacking followed by robbery and rape related kidnappings There have been 686 more cases of kidnapping, compared to the same comparative period. CONCLUSION As I conclude, These crime figures show how far a solid plan, targeted policing and resourcing can go. We have committed to improve our state of policing, through specialized policing and refocusing our efforts and expertise in taking down organized crime syndicates. Over and above the CIT and kidnapping speacialised units, the SAPS has also established specialised units to deal with organised crimes in KZN, Eastern Cape, Gauteng. In addition to the specialized units within the DPCI, It is also encouraging that the Western Cape and Gauteng provinces boast fully functional murder and robbery units. Organised crime Investigation units are also on board in tackling murder and roberries, as well as taxi violence in KwaZulu Natal and the Eastern Cape. DPCI SPEACIALISED UNITS There is no doubt that capacitation of the SAPS with the recruitment of 12 thousand trainees this year, will further add to the gains of the service. These statistics are not necessarily a win for the SAPS, BUT they are certainly an improvement. The last three months of 2021, were NOT a “Free For All” for criminals. It is through the acceleration of this policing momentum and improving our working relations with communities, through Community based structures, such as Community Policing Forums (CPF) structures and other NGOs who have also been in the forefront of the fight against the scourge, that this crime picture can be improved. Let me end of by reminding communities, that complaints of wrongdoing by any police officer at any police station, through the SAPS Service complaints center on 0800 333 177 Tip offs and complaints can also be sent to the MySAPS App www.saps.gov.za Other transgressions by police, should be directed to the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) With those words, let me hand over to Major General Thulare Sekhukhune who will give a Presentation which will reflect an overview of the 2021/2022 Quarter three crime statistics. I Thank you. All Contact Crimes decreased by 4.0% Crime Category Figures Murder 8.9% Sexual Offences - 9.0% Attempted Murder - 3.5% Assault to do grievous bodily harm - 7.2% Common Assault - 1.7% Common Robbery - 11.0% Robbery with aggravating circumstances - 1.3% All Sexual Offences decreased by 9.0% Crime Category Figures Rape - 7.4% Sexual Assault - 13.4% Attempted Sexual Offences - 16.2% Contact Sexual Offences -22.7% Crime Category Figures Carjacking 13.8% Robbery at Residential Premises - 0.4% Robbery at Non-Residential Premises 1.7% Robbery of Cash-In-Transit - 7.7% Bank Robbery 6 counts higher Truck hijacking 2.8% Contact-Related Crimes increased by 2.0% Crime Categories Figures Arson 0.6% Malicious damage to property 2.1% All Property-Related Crimes decreased 17.7% Crime Categories Figures Burglary at non-residential premises - 7.3% Burglary at residential premises - 7.3% Theft of motor vehicle and motor cycle - 3.2% Theft out or from motor vehicle - 11.1% Stock Theft - 5.7% Issued by SAPS, 18 February 2022