Premier Zikalala fails to come clean over cost of queens’ cars  16 February 2022 The Democratic Alliance in KwaZulu-Natal notes the response by Premier Sihle Zikalala to claims that his Office overspent by more than half a million Rand when buying five luxury SUVs for wives of the late King Goodwill Zwelithini. The information, which was shared with the public by the DA yesterday, forms part of a written parliamentary reply by the Premier. In a scathing attack on the DA, which failed to deal with the issue at hand, the Premier has denied any wrongdoing. He also stated categorically that the cost of the five Prados falls within the R800 000 national government prescript before VAT. It is unclear where he gets his information from when the parliamentary reply itself states the following; Toyota Prado (Each) (Excl VAT) R873.469.00 (Incl VAT) R1 004 489.35 These numbers speak for themselves. Even the before VAT figure for the five cars shows that the Premier and his Office were not in line with national government prescripts. (view full reply here) It does not take a maths genius to figure this out. The Premier is also well aware that when Legislature budgets are approved, they include VAT so that when the R5 million for the cars was approved, it included VAT. The Premier’s words have highlighted his inability to separate fact from fiction, with one lie after another. The question is: What is he hiding and why does he not simply tell the truth? Instead, his response shows extreme arrogance which is not helping the situation. What the Premier should have done yesterday is admit his error and apologise to the people of KZN for this over-expenditure. Yet he continues to defend the indefensible, first blaming officials and then later saying that the DA needs maths lessons. The question now is this: How much longer must the people of KZN put up with lies from the Premier and his ANC? And does the Premier truly understand the issue of accountability - which he swore to when he took office? If the Premier is indeed an honourable man, he will come clean and admit his error. If he is an honourable man he will apologise to the people of KZN. He has the perfect opportunity to do so during his State of the Province Address (SOPA) next week. Without accountability and transparency, there can be no good governance. The Premier needs to acknowledge his shortcomings and account to the public. Issued by Zwakele Mncwango, Chief Whip to the DA in the KZN Legislature, 16 February 2022