South African Government calls for a peaceful resolution of the escalating conflict between the Russian Federation and Ukraine 24 February 2022 The Republic of South Africa is dismayed at the escalation of the conflict in Ukraine. We regret that the situation has deteriorated despite calls for diplomacy to prevail. Armed conflict will no doubt result in human suffering and destruction, the effects of which will not only affect Ukraine but also reverberate across the world.  No country is immune to the effects of this conflict. As the UN Secretary-General has indicated, the conflict will have a huge impact on the “global economy in a moment when we are emerging from the COVID pandemic and so many developing countries need to have space for the recovery”. South Africa calls on Russia to immediately withdraw its forces from Ukraine in line with the United Nations Charter, which enjoins all member states to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice are not endangered. South Africa emphasises respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of states. As a nation birthed through negotiation, South Africa is always appreciative of the potential dialogue has in averting a crisis and de-escalating conflict. In line with our strong commitment to the peaceful resolution of conflict, South Africa urges all parties to devote increased efforts to diplomacy and to find a solution that will help avert further escalation. The door of diplomacy should never be closed even as conflict has broken out. We also urge all parties to approach the situation in a spirit of compromise, with all sides respecting international law. In light of the escalating conflict, we call on all parties to resume diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the concerns raised expressed by Russia. South Africa further calls on all parties to uphold and protect human rights and abide by their obligations in terms of international law and international humanitarian law. South Africa continues to support and encourage regional initiatives such as the Minsk Agreements, and we welcome the work of the Normandy Format, the Trilateral Contact Group and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). South Africa calls on the UN Security Council to play its role in the search for peace. The Security Council remains the primary body tasked with the mandate to maintain international peace and security and it must exercise its responsibility fully in this regard. We also believe that the Good Offices of the UN Secretary-General could also make a positive contribution in finding a lasting solution to this conflict. The South African Embassy in Kyiv is monitoring developments closely and is also assisting South African nationals in Ukraine. Statement issued by Mr Clayson Monyela, Spokesperson for DIRCO, 24 February 2022 Previous: South African Government is concerned about the escalating tensions between Russia and Ukraine 23 February 2022 The South African Government is concerned about the ongoing tensions at the Ukraine and Russia border, a situation if allowed to further deteriorate, could have regional and global ramifications. South Africa urges all parties to devote increased efforts to diplomacy and to find a solution that will help de-escalate tensions and avert armed conflict. Commenting on the situation, the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, Dr Naledi Pandor, said: “All parties have much to gain from a negotiated outcome and much to lose from unnecessary and violent conflict.” South Africa further calls on the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) to play a central role in the search for peace. “The UNSC is the body given the mandate for maintenance of international peace and security and it must exercise its role fully. As South Africa, we believe all the issues of concern to any of the parties must be addressed in inclusive talks led by the UNSC,” Minister Pandor said. The world does not need another war as that will result in death and destruction, hence our call for enhanced diplomacy. Statement issued by Mr Clayson Monyela, Spokesperson for DIRCO, 23 February 2022