Briefing on the outcome MEC Lesufi visit to Jan Viljoen 14 February 2022 The MEC for Education, Panyaza Lesufi visited Jan Viljoen High School in Randfontein today on Monday, 14 February 2022. The purpose of the visit was to obtain a report from the school leadership on the incident that occurred at the school on Friday, 11 February 2022. He was joined by MEC for Social Development, Ms Morakane Mosupyoe, the West Rand District Mayor Councilor Hulllet Hild, the Mayor of Randfontein City municipality, Councilor Itani Glady Khoza, Councilor Dumile Sithole and the Speaker of Council of West Rand District Municipality.  The MEC-led delegation met with different stakeholders including the SGB, the Principal, the School Management Team, the Police, the learners and the staff. The meeting received a briefing from the School Principal, the SGB and the Police. Subsequently, the MEC met with learner, parents of the affected learners, the learners at the schools and educators. MEC Lesufi also addressed the community that was gathered outside of the school. The following actions will be implemented: 1. Racism from any quarter is condemned and will be attacked. 2. The Principal has collated evidence and has requested anyone with information to come forward with the information. This evidence will be given to the South Africa Human Rights Commission, the Police and the SGB for further investigation. 3. The Police will continue with the investigation of the 4 cases and submit to the NPA for a decision. 4. The South African Human Rights Commission will be requested to investigate allegations of racism and other forms of discrimination. 5. The SGB must continue with Disciplinary Action against the perpetrators. 6. A staff member employed by the SGB accused of sexual harassment will be placed on precautionary suspensions. Department of Social Development will take statements from any interest party. 7. The Department will implement a programme of Diversity Management to assist the school as it goes through the crucible of transformation. 8. In-contact classes will be suspended until Thursday 15 February. Lessons will be provided remotely through online and other means. 9. A parents meeting will be convened on Thursday. “Racism and other forms of discrimination should be eliminated. The incident at the schools reflects deep-seated racist attitudes in our schools and community. We must grasp this opportunity to ensure that the school is fully transformed and is a safe and welcoming space for all people regardless of their race, class or religion. We appeal to everyone to give this process and opportunity and not incite violence,” said MEC Lesufi. Issued by Oupa Bodibe, Acting Spokesperson for the Gauteng Department of Education, 14 February 2022