Western Cape human settlements issues 736 documents for latest contractor’s framework 16 February 2022 Since the Western Cape Department of Human Settlements (WCDoHS) launched its latest contractor’s framework on 21 January 2022, 736 tender documents have already been issued. Of these, 659 were collected from the provincial office in Cape Town and 77 from the office in George. Submissions close at 11am on 25 February 2022. This initiative invites bids from all qualifying Engineering and Construction Contractors to participate in a Framework Agreement with the WCDoHS. This agreement will be applicable for a period of three (3) years. This means that all those with successful bid submissions, are placed on the framework, where should they meet all the relevant criteria for a specific contract, would then be able to submit quotations for that contract. The scope of engineering and construction work for the purpose of the implementation of Human Settlements Infrastructure Delivery, may fall within one (or more) of the following classes of construction work: General Building (2GB to 7GB) Civil Engineering (2CE to 7CE) Electrical Engineering Works – Building (2EB to 7EB) Electrical Engineering Works – Infrastructure (2EP to 7EP) Landscaping, irrigation and horticulture works (2SH to 7SH) Steel security fencing or precast concrete fencing (2SQ to 7SQ) Western Cape Minister of Human Settlements, Tertuis Simmers said: “I’m pleased to note that there are a number of contractors who have shown a keen interest in this framework. This is the type of response I was hoping for, as we’ve created this avenue so that more of our Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises can also access these opportunities. This framework is open to all that meet the criteria.” Further information is available here: https://www.westerncape.gov.za/assets/departments/human-settlements/docs/tenders/2022/hs-tenders-advertisement-hsc_05-2021-2022-frameworkcontractengineeringconstruction.pdf Minister Simmers added: “I’d like to encourage all those who meet the various criteria to not let this opportunity pass them by, particularly since there is a lower uptake in the Garden Route area. As the Western Cape Government, we’re fully aware that by empowering a contractor in this manner will lead to further job creation and economic growth, which is a key priority for us.” Issued by Marcellino Martin, Spokesperson for Minister Tertuis Simmers, 16 February 2022