KZN political killings: DA calls on Speaker to allow Debate on a Matter of Public Importance 28 February 2022 The Democratic Alliance (DA) today calls on KwaZulu-Natal Legislature Speaker, Nontembeko Boyce, to urgently convene a special meeting of the provincial parliament in order to deal with the issue of ongoing politically motivated murders, including those of traditional leaders. The DA will also write to the Speaker in this regard and request that the meeting takes the form of a Debate on a Matter of Public Importance. The move comes after yet another councillor was gunned down on Friday last week, this time in Umvoti municipality. The DA is saddened by the murder of Councillor Thembinkosi Lombo in what is the fourth such political murder in KZN since October. Sadly, it seems that infighting within the ANC is continuing to cost lives and destabilise municipalities in our province. Last week, during his State of the Province Address (SOPA), the Premier made very little reference to political killings in our province. While he did highlight the killing of traditional leaders, he failed to mention any clear plan on how to deal with it. He also completely failed to mention the Moerane Report – an independent report into KZN’s political killings. This Report and its numerous recommendations were presented to the Legislature years ago yet to date they have not been implemented. For as long as the Premier ignores the Moerane Report it is clear that he is not serious about dealing with political killings. The DA expects the Premier to tell members of the KZN Legislature why this Report is simply gathering dust. We expect him to outline a clear plan to deal with these murders. The DA remains hopeful that the Speaker will accede to our request. The Premier must account to the people of KZN. For too long, they have had their lives endangered and affected by ongoing ANC internal strife. This matter must be debated and a way forward established if we are to build a peaceful province together. Issued by Martin Meyer, DA KZN Spokesperson on CoGTA, 28 February 2022