Ekurhuleni and Johannesburg pass adjustment budgets 25 February 2022 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is delighted to announce that the DA-led coalition governments in the City of Ekurhuleni and Johannesburg passed their adjustment budgets for the 2021/2022 financial year. These municipalities have been operating on ANC-approved budgets since last year, making it extremely hard for the multi-party coalition governments to implement new plans and speed up service delivery. In Ekurhuleni, Mayor Tania Campbell inherited massive service delivery backlogs with the municipality being in a poor financial state. Mayor Campbell announced that the back-to-basics adjustment budget will prioritise infrastructure and economic development. R117 million has been allocated to promote the security of energy supply – a further R40 million for maintenance and R77 million for new infrastructure. R58 million will go towards economic development to create job opportunities. An allocation of R17 million has also been made for repairs and maintenance of human settlements. In Johannesburg, Mayor Mpho Phalatse announced that at least R53 million would be allocated to Rea Vaya related projects, R53 million will go towards the improvement of the Orange Farm transport facilities and R153 million will increase for City Power infrastructure to secure electricity supply. R183,3 million will be allocated for bulk water infrastructure projects, R296,5 million increases JRA infrastructure projects, R37,5-million in increases for the completion of clinics in Alexandra and Orchards and R93,9 million in increases for key housing projects across the City. The remaining DA-led coalition governments in the City of Tshwane and Mogale Local Municipality will table and vote on their respective adjustment budgets on Monday 28 February 2022. The passing of the adjustment budgets is a win for the residents of Ekurhuleni and Johannesburg who will start to experience the DA difference in their areas. The DA congratulates Mayor Campbell and Mayor Phalatse for sticking to the election promises; to accelerate basic service delivery, improve infrastructure and prioritise economic development to enhance opportunities for the people of both cities. Issued by Solly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 27 February 2022