DA KZN to report the inhumane living condition of Mathe transit camp residents 11 February 2022 Having visited the residents of Mate transit camp in October 2021, I was appalled by the conditions in which they find themselves. The transit camp was built in 2009 and was supposedly temporary accommodation – for 6 months – before the occupants were relocated to more formal housing. This never transpired. The majority of the residents have been living in the transit camp for more than 15 years, see here, here, here,here The accommodation is a 4 meter by 3 meter prefab with a tin roof. The unit is only one room and families have to cook, eat and sleep in the same space. The units have to accommodate an entire family, in some cases this will mean 2 adults and 6 children in this cramped environment. The ablution facilities in the transit camp are an absolute disgrace and not fit for any human. The majority of the ablution blocks have only one functioning toilet and this toilet needs to service approximately 100 people. These facilities are used by both males, females and children which is unacceptable. One of the reasons I wanted to return to Mate transit camp was to highlight the living conditions and the inequality that remains a way of life for this community. I received a warm and welcoming reception from the community who during my stay and discussions continue to highlight their anger and dismay at the failures of government to address their challenges. Being on the ground and staying with the community and living in one of the transit units certainly highlights the daily struggles faced by the residents. It cannot be that 28 years after the advent of democracy in South Africa that this blatant and stark socioeconomic disparity continue to divide our province. One would hope that after my stay, highlighting the inequality and living conditions, the ANC-led Municipality and Province will wake up to reality and admit and address their failures. I will be further writing to the Human Rights Commission informing them of the plight of the residents of Mathe camp to consider and implement legal action. Issued by Francois Rodgers, DA KZN Leader, 11 February 2022