#RealGautengSOPA: Gauteng province buckling under corruption while residents endure poor service delivery and unemployment 17 February 2022 My Fellow Democrats Members of the Gauteng Provincial Caucus The way our country has been operating has changed drastically over the last two years. Never did we think that we would be living through a pandemic in our lifetime. The Covid-19 pandemic came in silently like a thief in the night and disrupted our daily lives, forcing many of us to change how we go about doing our jobs and how our children are receiving a proper education. Suddenly our economy was plunged into disarray, a state of disaster was declared and unexpectedly embracing the 4th Industrial Revolution was the order of the day. However, while some of us were fortunate enough to keep our jobs, many of the residents of our province suddenly found themselves either being forced to take annual leave, or without an income as the principle of ‘no work no pay’ was enforced where employers were unable to maintain their current wage bill without providing any goods and services. The government was the only hope to ensure that our people are protected from the pandemic through providing funds to procure life-saving resources such as Personal Protection Equipment (PPEs) and relief grants. Little did we know that the same government we trusted with our livelihoods, was the same government who in fact took advantage of our plight to steal the money and resources meant to help the residents of Gauteng through the pandemic. Yes, we have come a long way since February 2020, when it became obvious that like many other countries around the world, we too would be affected by Covid-19. But here is the thing- Gauteng is the economic hub of the country. We have the highest rate of in-migration as many South African citizens come to Gauteng to seek better economic opportunities so as to provide a better life and future for their families. One would think that the current Gauteng government under the leadership of Premier David Makhura, would have been able to seamlessly transition our economy into one where technology is fully utilised in all our schools across the province, where measures like social distancing in our schools could be put in place in a blink of an eye. This did not happen! In 2014, Premier Makhura promised that our residents would have access to broadband and free Wi-Fi in partnership with the private sector- This has not happened! Instead in 2020, what we saw was a tender hastily awarded to IN2IT technologies to the value of R30 million for the provision of G-SOC Security System. Officials used the Covid-19 pandemic as an excuse for not following the proper supply chain management process. Again in 2018, the Premier made a similar promise that by 2020 the public money would be used in the creation of the broadband infrastructure so that all residents have access to broadband connectivity. This has not happened! Yet we have a country and economy that is now becoming more and more reliant on technology. The pandemic has shown us that there is a gap in the market where our youth - if given the proper training - would be able to start their own businesses that embrace the 4th Industrial Revolution. Last year, a 24-year-old entrepreneur in Hammanskraal, Godiragetse Mogajane started a delivery service using WhatsApp. Hammanskraal is one of many townships in the province where apps like UberEATS and Mr Delivery do not operate. He noticed a gap in the market and took advantage of it by using modern technology that many of our residents have access to. We need more of this, and government must assist in facilitating and providing support to the growth of the economy. That is if they are fully committed to ensuring that our youth receive the training they need to help them create their own job opportunities which would require the government to keep true to their promises of creating a space for our youth to have access to a stable and reliable internet connection. My Fellow Democrats, our unemployment rate is skyrocketing. Since the Covid-19 pandemic hit, the unemployment rate went from bad to worse. In the latest Quarterly Labour Force Survey published by Statistics South Africa, Gauteng’s unemployment rate is at 37 percent and has been increasing compared to the previous quarters. In the first quarter it was at 33.7 percent, second quarter it was 35.4 percent and now it is 37 percent. It is the responsibility of the government to create a conducive environment for our residents to seek and find employment opportunities. But if we have incidents like the unrest we saw in July once again take our province by storm, the very businesses that we want to invest in our economy will not do so. The private sector will see our province as unstable and will be hesitant to invest funds into an already fragile economy that is seen as a time bomb where at any time looting and rioting can break out. Furthermore, in 2019 during his SOPA Premier Makhura indicated that e-toll system is not working and to date he has not barely indicated on what will happen to the e-tolling system in the province. This clearly shows that Premier Makhura is not a man of his word as he has failed to convince his national counterpart that e-tolls have no future in Gauteng and must be scrapped immediately. Corruption is one of the major characteristics that can be used to describe Makhura’s government and that has had a huge impact on service delivery. I remember when Premier Makhura came to office in 2014 he promised the people of Gauteng that he will decisively fight corruption in his government and act against those implicated. Like all the promises that he has made, only a handful have materialised. The damning SIU report on PPE corruption has now exposed the rotten corruption within Makhura’s administration. Gauteng has the largest amount of money wasted on corruption, all of which happened under Premier Makhura’s watch. Contracts to the value of R6 037 901 185 are currently under investigation by the SIU, while 38 disciplinary hearings and executive action are also underway. A handful of those implicated have been held to account while the rest are continuing with their lives as if they did nothing wrong. As a country, we cannot afford to have an endless number of commissions established to probe corruption - something that can be curbed should our government properly implement the consequence management system. They should ensure strict adherence to Supply Chain Management processes and an open tender system. This is the only way in which we can ensure that only businesses who can deliver on the goods and services required are doing business with the government. Chances of there being any corrupt activities, as we have seen with the procurement of PPE at the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, will also be significantly reduced. This trend of only empowering those businesses that may have political connections needs to end immediately. Our residents are already suffering because of the decline in our economy and the Covid-19 pandemic has made this even worse. The money that was lost to corruption over the last two years would have gone a long way to improving the lives of our residents had it been channelled to small businesses, entrepreneurs and used to improve our ailing infrastructure. Holding our government officials and public representatives to account is the only way in which we can ensure that the rot of corruption that runs so deep within our provincial government is removed. It is the public money that is being looted by thieves masquerading as honourable politicians and officials who unashamedly steal our hard-earned taxes. This needs to end, and it needs to end now. Corruption cannot and should not be the norm in our government structures. In addition, Makhura's-led Gauteng government has not yet reopened all the sections of the fire-damaged Charlotte Maxeke Hospital despite making promises that the Accident and Emergency Unit would be reopen last month. Lives are at risk as thousands of patients have lost access to specialist services such as heart, cancer, and mental health. This government is failing to ensure that this hospital sections reopen but allowed money to be wasted on the AngloGold Ashati Hospital. For years, Premier Makhura has said that lifestyle audits will be conducted on all government officials. This has not happened. Under his watch, corruption has festered and has now turned into a cancerous blight on the province that is seemingly very difficult to get rid of because the political will does not exist to do so. The following promises were made by Premier Makhura in 2014 and have not yet been fully achieved: 2014 · The provincial government and municipalities working together with the private sector in the massive rollout of broadband and free wi-fi across the province as a backbone of the new economy. Gauteng should be able to realise 100% internet connectivity in the next five years. (NOT ACHIEVED); · To boost employment and economic inclusion, the provincial government and municipalities will procure 75% of all goods and services from South African producers, especially SMMEs, township enterprises and black-owned, women and youth enterprises (NOT ACHIEVED); · Working closely with state-owned enterprises, PRASA and TRANSNET, to re-industrialise our province and build an economic infrastructure that will boost employment creation and economic inclusion through investing more than R300 billion in the post, freight, rail and pipeline capacity (NOT ACHIEVED); · Over the next 200 days, we will work with the Mayors of metros and districts and the private sector, within the National Policy Framework, to develop a plan on the healthy energy mix (with an emphasis on smart and green energy solutions) for Gauteng. (NOT ACHIEVED); · In 200 days, we will speed up the handing over of existing housing projects that are complete and make sure that all houses are allocated to the legitimate owners. As part of preventing the abuse of the housing waiting list, we will introduce the use of biometric technology. (NOT ACHIEVED); · The next five years shall see greater efforts in harnessing ICT to deliver education in the context of e-governance and modernisation of the delivery of public services - smart schools and the classroom of the future. (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · We shall stabilise the finances of the Health Department, improve the delivery of quality healthcare, reduce waiting time and queues, increase professional staff and invest in infrastructure, including the ICT as part of our programme of modernising public services and e-governance. (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will embark on a programme and campaign to promote healthy lifestyles. In this regard, we will in partnership with local government and the private sector to build more recreational facilities and increase access to training facilities in communities. (NOT ACHIEVED); · Over the next 100 days, we shall unveil a comprehensive and more integrated EPWP and CWP that will create over one million job opportunities within five years. (NOT ACHIEVED); · Over the next 100 days, we shall work with the local government to review current structures and processes of community participation. (NOT ACHIEVED); · Set up a panel to review the impact of e-tolls and invite new proposals on how we can find a lasting solution to this matter, working with the national government, municipalities and all sectors of society. (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); 2015 · The Central Development Corridor is anchored around the City of Joburg as the hub of finance, services, ICT and pharmaceutical industries (NOT ACHIEVED); · The Eastern Development Corridor anchored around the economy of the Ekurhuleni Metro as the hub of manufacturing, logistics and transport industries (NOT ACHIEVED); · The Northern Development Corridor anchored around Tshwane as our nation’s administrative Capital City and the hub of the automotive sector, research, development, innovation and the knowledge-based economy (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · The Western Corridor encompassing the economy of the current West Rand district and the creation of new industries, new economic nodes and new cities (NOT ACHIEVED); · The Southern Corridor encompassing the economy of the Sedibeng district and the creation of new industries, new economic nodes and new cities (NOT ACHIEVED); · Over the next five years, we will mobilise more than R10 billion in public and private investments in the regeneration of the Joburg CBD as the seat of the provincial government (NOT ACHIEVED); · Over the next five years, 140 000 housing units will be built in Lion Park, in Diepsloot East, in Fleurhof, Cosmo City, Malibongwe Ridge and Goud Rand (NOT ACHIEVED); · Together with the Ekurhuleni Metro and national government, we are now undertaking 29 industrial initiatives, under the banner of the Aerotropolis, to revitalise manufacturing, aviation, transport and logistics industries linked to the OR Tambo International Airport. This will dramatically transform the current industrial structure of the economy of Ekurhuleni (NOT ACHIEVED); · The Tambo Springs Inland port development will have an estimated R7.5 billion investment over five years. This project will create a total of 110 000 jobs over fifteen years (NOT ACHIEVED); · Bus Rapid Transit System in Ekurhuleni whose first phase will be operational by March next year. Over the next five years, more than R 500 million will be invested in the BRT system in Ekurhuleni (NOT ACHIEVED); · More than 100 000 housing units will be delivered over the next five years in areas such as Chief Albert Luthuli, John Dube Extension 2, Tsakane Extension 22, Germiston South, Leeuwpoort, Rietfontein and Clayville Extension 45 (NOT ACHIEVED); · The City of Tshwane will invest R525 million to establish a Business Process Outsourcing Park in Hammanskraal. The Park will offer on-site training, technical support, incubators for SMMEs. The project is expected to create over 1 000 jobs during construction and over 1 000 indirect jobs (NOT ACHIEVED); · We continue to support the automotive sector in the Rosslyn cluster through the Automotive Industry Development Centre. In the coming months, the AIDC will launch its second incubation centre in Rosslyn, Tshwane, to accelerate the development of sustainable SMMEs within the vehicle assembly industry (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · We are working with the West Rand municipalities and private sector partners to unlock the potential of the Lanseria Aiport logistics hub. Thus far the private sector is injecting at least R 500 million in Capex for the development of the airport, with over R10 billion expected to be invested in Lanseria over the next 15 years (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED) · We are partnering with the private sector to upscale the aquaculture potential of this Corridor, in particular, in the breeding of prawns. This initiative will create a total of 6 512 jobs in the West Rand over three years (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will work with the University of Johannesburg and other partners around the deployment of solar technologies and solar manufacturing plant or solar farm in the Western Corridor as an area earmarked for renewable energy industrial development 45 (NOT ACHIEVED); · .With regard to human settlements, more than 160 000 housing units will be built in Syferfontein, Chief Mogale, Kagiso Extension 13, Leratong, Westonaria Borwa, Thusang, Waagterskop, Kokosi Extension 6 and 7, Droogeheuwel, Mohlakeng Extension 11, Khutsong South Extension 1, 2 and 3 and Vaarkenslaagte 45 (NOT ACHIEVED); · The second area of focus is to unlock the agricultural potential of Sedibeng as the food basket of the Gauteng City-Region and position the region as an Agropolis.In this regard, we are working with the private sector to support 32 black farmers to plant barley and maize to be supplied to the nearby Heineken Brewery. The project will create 1 000 permanent jobs per annum over three years (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · Over the next five years, the City of Johannesburg, a component of the township economy, has set aside · R3 billion, Tshwane R22 million and Ekurhuleni has made available more than R150 million to support the township economy and township entrepreneurs (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · We have now committed to set aside 30% of the public procurement budget for township enterprises over the next five years (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will strengthen three existing township economic hubs in Mohlakeng, Winterveld and Tembisa in the coming months. Seven new township hubs will be established in Ennerdale, Hammanskraal, Mabopane and Reiger Park. We will also revitalise the Industrial Parks in Katlehong, Orlando, Residentia, Khutsong and Ennerdale (NOT ACHIEVED); · In Diepsloot, about 160 township entrepreneurs involved in light manufacturing and other productive activities will benefit from the R1.6-billion investment in the Riversands/Diepsloot SMME Incubation Hub, with state-of-art facilities (NOT ACHIEVED); · We have been working with municipalities to finalise plans to bring in additional 1200 megawatts of electricity by increasing the generation capacity of the current coal-fired power stations in Tshwane (Rooiwal and Pretoria West Power) and Joburg (Kelvin Station) (NOT ACHIEVED); · We are installing rooftop solar panels for all our government buildings. We estimate that we have available 8 million square metres of rooftop space suitable for this and will be able to generate 300-500 megawatts of electricity (NOT ACHIEVED); · We are implementing a programme to retrofit our coal-fired boilers with natural gas. We are implementing the Tri-generation programme in six hospitals. Tri-generation is a technology that can produce electricity for heating and cooling using gas. We are initiating the waste to energy programme. This programme is aimed at converting waste from our facilities into bio-gas (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will continue our energy efficiency programme through which we aim to replace existing lights in all our facilities and government buildings with LED lights. We have thus far replaced 45 000 lights in our health facilities (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · We will also focus on encouraging rainwater harvesting in households, government and business premises and eradicating water leakages through focusing on infrastructure maintenance (NOT ACHIEVED); · Our target is to create 500 000 decent and sustainable jobs and entrepreneurship opportunities for young people by 2019 (NOT ACHIEVED); · We have designed a prototype treatment centre that will serve as a one-stop centre to provide integrated and comprehensive treatment of substance abuse and improve access. In addition to in-patient and out-patient treatment, the centre will also provide skills development, and serve as a halfway house to ease integration back into society. Building of the first centre will commence in 2016 and we will complete centres in each of the province’s five regions (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will continue to expand access to victim support services and places of refuge for victims of abuse, bringing the total number of green doors in the province to 50 over the next few years (NOT ACHIEVED); · Our work includes the provision of food parcels to the most vulnerable and children in the poorest wards support for small-scale farmers and cooperatives and the training of 14 500 youth beneficiaries through our 40 job centres in the province. An additional 4000 beneficiaries will be provided with economic, entrepreneurial opportunities and skills (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · The Integrity Management and Anti-Corruption Unit will be fully operational by the end of this year (NOT ACHIEVED) 2016 · I would like to report that we have reduced the time taken for the approval of the environmental impact assessment from 18-24 months down to three months. We are confident we will reach our target of approving all EAIs within 30 days (NOT ACHIEVED); · This year, the Innovation Hub will expand its Start-up Weekends and Bootcamps to train at least 100 entrepreneurs in all our five development corridors including youth from suburbs (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · The Katlehong, Soweto and Kagiso township industrial hubs will be accredited and open for business before the end of the 2016/17 financial year (NOT ACHIEVED); · In Ekurhuleni, the construction of 3.6 km of dedicated lanes and stations has been completed. The first phase of Ekurhuleni’s BRT system, Harambee, from Tembisa to Isando, is underway and will be operational in July this year (NOT ACHIEVED); · In response to the growing demand for Gautrain services, we are adding 48 new trains to the fleet, at R 3.5 billion, underwritten by the Development Bank of Southern Africa. This investment will create more than 9 000 jobs (NOT ACHIEVED); · In Ekurhuleni (the Eastern Corridor), we are upgrading Heidelberg Road from Leondale Forsdick Road to Barry Marias Road from a single carriageway to a dual carriageway. The project will improve accessibility for future developments in the Vosloorus, Leondale and Southern Ekurhuleni areas (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · Broadband connectivity is growing faster covering all parts of the City Region. Through our partnerships with the municipalities and the private sector we will reach our goal of 100% connectivity by 2019 (NOT ACHIEVED); · The provincial government’s Kopanong Precinct is back on track. It will contribute to the revitalisation of the Johannesburg central business district which will receive a major boost when Kopanong Precinct begins operation during the next financial year (NOT ACHIEVED); · We are on track with the modernisation of our public health services. The digitisation of patient files is currently underway and will be completed in all public hospitals in Gauteng by 2019. The e-health initiative is already improving efficiencies and drastically reducing waiting times (NOT ACHIEVED); · We have exceeded the 30% target with regards to the empowerment of women through our procurement policy and we are well on our way to reaching 50% by 2020 (NOT ACHIEVED); 2017 · The feasibility of a logistics hub on N12 between Rand-West and Merafong has been completed and work will begin this year (NOT ACHIEVED); · We know full well that to significantly decrease unemployment, we need to double this number and reach at least 600 000 new jobs over two years from 2017 till 2019 (NOT ACHIEVED); 2018 · The Gauteng Provincial Government has invested public money in the creation of broadband infrastructure towards the goal of 100% broadband connectivity in Gauteng by 2020 (NOT ACHIEVED); · Currently, the Gauteng Provincial Government spends 23% of the goods and services budget on women-owned businesses. We would like to achieve a target of 30% by 2019 (NOT ACHIEVED); · A total of thirty-one new mega settlement projects have been approved for all the five development corridors of the Gauteng City Region. These projects will yield more than 700 000 housing opportunities over five years (NOT ACHIEVED); 2019 · Targeting and enforcing procurement from businesses in townships to the value of 30% of Gauteng Provincial Government’s procurement budget (NOT ACHIEVED); · Ensuring that all SMMEs and township businesses contracting with the Gauteng Provincial Government are paid within 15 days to boost their sustainability (NOT ACHIEVED) · Continuing to invest in infrastructure that supports clusters of township businesses to expand, access markets and prosper. This will include rejuvenating township industrial parks, agri-hubs and local produce markets (NOT ACHIEVED) · Releasing land and unutilised buildings to allow those who can create real jobs and businesses in our townships to apply for leases from the provincial government for properties where they can start those businesses. (NOT ACHIEVED); · The 9 Ekasi Labs will be expanded to provide hot-desks with desktops and high-speed broadband in all townships where young people can practice new digital trades and learn through existing programmes such as Tshepo 1 Million (NOT ACHIEVED); · In partnership with the Taxi industry and municipalities, we will transform taxi rank facilities to become vibrant economic nodes in all townships and CBDs (NOT ACHIEVED) · Giving township enterprises, SMMEs and co-operatives the opportunity to maintain and repair government facilities, equipment, furniture and infrastructure. (NOT ACHIEVED); · Repositioning and the Gauteng Enterprise Propeller to provide funding and business development support for the growth and sustainability of SMMEs and co-operatives (NOT ACHIEVED) · We will also set up a joint township economy innovation fund with the private sector. This is in line with the announcement by President Ramaphosa of the establishment of the Township Entrepreneurial Fund (NOT ACHIEVED); · Within 12 months, I would like to see huge improvements in the maintenance of existing government buildings, including schools, clinics and hospitals in the implementation of the Government Immovable Asset Management Act (NOT ACHIEVED); · Within the first 12 months, I would like to see real improvements in the coordination, integration and optimal integration of all modes. The responsibility of the Gauteng Transport Authority is to deliver on this goal (NOT ACHIEVED); · Within six months I also want to see significant improvements in the conditions and operations of major intermodal public transport nodes such as Mabopane station, Marabastad, Park Station, Bree Street Taxi Rank, Germiston Station and Vereeniging Taxi Rank (NOT ACHIEVED); · Accordingly, I will appoint an advisory panel that will advise the provincial government on the fourth industrial revolution in the first 100 Days (NOT ACHIEVED); · Place 250,000 young people into long term jobs in the various growth sectors of the economy in partnership with Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator and the Youth Employment Service (YES) programme (NOT ACHIEVED); · Place 250,000 young people in public works employment programmes that are long term – including maintenance and repair of public facilities and infrastructure, cleaning and greening initiatives, safety and the care economy (NOT ACHIEVED); · Expand the welfare-to-work programme to reach 100 000 unemployed young women who are currently dependent on child support grants and empower them with skills to become employed and self-employed (NOT ACHIEVED); · Continue with a mass digital learning and digital skills programme to reach over 1 million young people, especially out of school youth (NOT ACHIEVED); · All vacant positions of CEOs of hospitals will be filled in the first 100 days and all critical posts in our health facilities will be filled by 2020 (NOT ACHIEVED); · Action and collaboration between municipalities and the province to make available 100 000 serviced stands with minimum building standards, over the next five years (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · In the next five years, crime should be reduced by 50% in the 40 high priority police stations (NOT ACHIEVED); · In the first twelve months, we will deploy 10 patrollers per ward in all 508 wards in Gauteng and revive and professionalise Community Policing Forums in all police precincts (NOT ACHIEVED); · To support victims of gender-based violence, during this term, we will ensure that no less than 50 000 victims of gender-based violence access psycho-social support (NOT ACHIEVED); · Over the next five years, our food security programme will be expanded to 2 million food-insecure people, while the school uniform programme will be expanded to 1 million learners from poor households, together with the distribution of 7 million dignity packs to girl learners (NOT ACHIEVED); · The welfare-to-work programme will be upscaled from 30 000 to 100 000 young women who will be empowered with skills that will enable them to graduate from social grants to work for themselves (NOT ACHIEVED); · Financial support will be provided to 1700 centres to reach 200 000 more children over the next five years, in addition to the 480 000 that are currently having access to early learning opportunities (NOT ACHIEVED); · Within 100 Days, all departments will identify priority social and economic interventions that must be implemented in the erstwhile Indian or classified Coloured townships across Gauteng (NOT ACHIEVED); · In September, I will sign performance and delivery agreements with all MECs and HODs based on the implementation plans of Growing Gauteng Together (NOT ACHIEVED); · Within the first 100 Days, we will re-establish the Policy Unit in the Office of the Premier in line with what President Ramaphosa has done is doing at a national government (NOT ACHIEVED); · Within 100 Days, the MEC for Finance and the MEC for Co-operative Governance will present a report plan to the Executive Council on implementation of Emfuleni recovery plan (NOT ACHIEVED); 2020 · In April this year, the provincial government together with SALGA will be requesting a Ministerial determination from Minister Gwede Mantashe to enable us to unlock renewable energy projects, in line with the window of opportunity opened by the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP 2019) (PARTIALLY ACHIEVED); · Over the next five years, the provincial government will rehabilitate, upgrade and construct 18 major arterial roads in the five development corridors, especially in Sedibeng and West Rand (NOT ACHIEVED); · As part of our commitment to provide 100 000 service stands to qualifying Gauteng residents who want to and can build their own homes, we will release 10 000 serviced stands spread across the different corridors between April and June this year (NOT ACHIEVED); · In response to the rising demand for new schools, we will build 100 new schools in the next 10 years, 50% of which will be built in the next five years (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will also re-open the 70 schools that had to be closed during the years when township schools were avoided by parents and were not attracting enrolment numbers (NOT ACHIEVED); · We have appointed new CEOs for 12 hospitals. The remaining three hospitals will have new CEOs in May this year (NOT ACHIEVED); · We committed to releasing bi-annual audits of the performance on the reduction of priority crimes for each of our 142 police stations. The report is ready and will be released to the public in April this year as the new financial year commences. (NOT ACHIEVED); · We will employ 400 additional traffic police officers over the next three years, to increase visibility and enhance road safety (NOT ACHIEVED); · All officials who are part of the Supply Chain Management (SCM) and Human Resource (HR) processes must be vetted with effect from April this year (NOT ACHIEVED). 2021 · The Vaal SEZ company has been established to ensure that the feasibility study, master plan and the regional spatial development framework and SEZ are approved by the end of this year (NOT ACHIEVED); · 157 traffic officers have been employed. We will add more officers this year until we reach our target of 400 in 2022 (NOT ACHIEVED); · We have finalised a total of 73 forensic investigations and 66 cases were referred to law enforcement agencies for criminal investigation and civil recovery processes (NOT ACHIEVED); · Members of the Executive Council have submitted their details for the lifestyle audit that are being conducted by the State Security Agency. The outcome of the lifestyle audit will be made public (NOT ACHIEVED) Enough is enough with empty promises, it is the time to deliver, and the DA has the solution to accelerate service delivery, curb corruption and prioritize economic growth above stealing. A DA-led Gauteng government will do the following: · Conduct lifestyle audits on all government officials. · Ensure that all schools have the proper infrastructure in place and that asbestos schools are replaced with a proper brick and mortar structure as a matter of urgency. · Allow our youth to empower themselves with skills needed to enter the job market so that they can start their businesses or seek long-term gainful employment · Ensure that the Gauteng Enterprise Propeller provides the necessary support to small businesses and entrepreneurs and that the budget they are given is spent. · Ensure that all the residents in Gauteng have access to a reliable internet connection at various government buildings like libraries and community halls. · Always hold MECs and government officials to account by ensuring that all the checks and balances are put in place to ensure that proper procurement procedures through an open tender system are followed. In terms of certain portfolios: Social Development 12 buildings were given to the Gauteng Department of Social Development in Gauteng (6) and Western Cape (6), of these none have been occupied in Gauteng. The department constantly underspends and this amount currently stands at R1.3 billion. There is a dire social need in this province. In terms of the president’s ECD stimulus package, the department has not yet spent a cent of that money. This department continues to be a delinquent payer when it comes to paying NGOs on time. Unfortunately these NGOs then became victimised by the department and worked out of the system when raising concerns over the late payment. Community Safety There are 1169 police vehicles that are out-of-service which means that police operations are severely impacted. The Ga- Rankuwa police station was out of electricity for six months and just got switched on this week after pressure from the DA. It should be noted that Eskom is the direct provider of electricity and failed to provide electricity while the Provincial SAPS is failing to provide alternative sources of power such as a stand-by generator. There is also a shortage of social workers to deal with victim centres at the police stations; in certain instances one social worker is responsible for a number of police stations. Infrastructure Development Not a single cent has been spent on Charlotte Maxeke Hospital as all the work being done is being paid by the Solidarity Fund There is a disconnection between hospital leadership and the department Anglo Gold Ashanti has been built but only has three patients Human Settlements and COGTA There is a one million housing backlog and only 30 000 housing units are built per year The department underspends by R2 billion and the money is returned to Treasury The Hostel Redevelopment plan only exists on paper (Dube, Alexandra, Bekkesdal, Sethokwa , Winterveld) Formalisation of informal settlement is not happening and there is a continuous mushrooming of informal settlements Housing Mega projects have been blocked by red tape and contractors not finishing on time and within budget. Education The online application process for Grades 1 and 8 must be reviewed to ensure that it guarantees parental choice. The department must employ more teachers The school infrastructure must be taken from DID and be placed back in the hands of the Department of Education to ensure the speedy building of schools. There are many schools that are still incomplete and on hold namely, Mayibuye Primary School, Nokuthula Special School, Braamficher Primary School, Nancefield Primary School and Semphoto Secondary School Transport We are not building or expanding existing roads, yet we have an ever increasing number of cars on the roads. We need to invest heavily in public transport infrastructure Gauteng has massive rail infrastructure that should be devolved to the province and be incorporated under Gautrain. Economic Development Gauteng is losing 93 jobs every hour which means that poverty has mushroomed in Gauteng The Gauteng Enterprise Propeller continues to sit with R250 million which is supposed to assist small businesses. The Gauteng Growth and Development Agency still struggles to attract local and foreign investment Premier Makhura is increasingly missing in action which clearly shows that he is buckling under the pressure and can no longer maintain the pretence of good governance in Gauteng. Premier Makhura you are only left with two SOPAs, then you are out. The old saying goes that ‘a fish rots from the head’. This litany of broken promises shows that Premier Makhura is incapable and is not fit to govern. He will mark the history of the end of the ANC administration in Gauteng come 2024. The residents of Gauteng do not have to be fearful as the Democratic Alliance is here and we are ready to fight for our Province and fight for our residents. Where we govern, we govern well. We are the party that will ensure that the Gauteng province will work better, Kuyasheshwa. We are the government in waiting and we are ready for 2024. We will demonstrate to the residents of Gauteng what it feels like to be governed by a government which cares for its residents; a government which puts the needs of its residents first; a government that stands for the people, a government that that stands with the people. I thank you. Issued by Solly Msimanga, Official Leader of the Opposition-Gauteng, 17 February 2022