ANC has track record of abusing state resources 3 February 2022 The Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature wants to caution the ANC to stop labelling the IFP as a party that is corrupt and is abusing state resources. This, after allegations that an official from the KZN Department of Agriculture was caught red-handed using a state vehicle to transport IFP members during a By-Election in Ukhahlamba on Wednesday. The ANC must stop its nonsensical utterances. The IFP is squarely against the abuse of state resources to garner votes. Further, it is shocked by the high levels of hypocrisy shown by the ANC. It is an open secret that the ANC has a track record of abusing state resources during elections. The IFP has, in the past, witnessed state vehicles being used to transport ANC members to the polls. In 2014, in a By-Election in Ward 13 in Ulundi, government vehicles were seen transporting food parcels allegedly used to influence voters. In 2018, a KwaZulu-Natal Department of Transport vehicle was found transporting ANC members during a By-Election in Nkandla, where the IFP went as far as opening a case with the local police. Pictures of vehicles from provincial government departments transporting ANC members were even sent to the Office of the Premier but he didn't raise a finger on any of these matters. Further, in 2019, the then-ANC-led Alfred Duma Municipality directed R400 000 in public funds towards the governing party's Thuma Mina campaign. The Municipality spent the money on printing calendars and diaries for the ANC and disguised it as Thuma Mina work. All our concerns fell on deaf ears. We therefore now call on ANC leaders to advocate for the arrest of their comrades who are implicated in criminal activities, rather than attacking the IFP. It appears that the ANC is attacking and attempting to discredit the IFP because people rejected the party during 2021 Local Government Elections. Today the IFP governs many more municipalities, including those formerly governed by the ANC. People are tired of the ANC’s propaganda on service delivery and its failure to create sustainable jobs. The IFP want to advise the ANC to invest its energy in addressing the corruption that has been exposed by the State Capture Report and SIU Report on PPE procurement. The IFP will not be distracted by the ANC’s shenanigans. We will continue to provide good governance, lead with integrity, and to provide services to all the municipalities that we govern. Issued by Blessed Gwala, IFP Chief Whip in the KZN Legislature, 3 February 2022