Premier Makhura admits DID has failed yet vows to keep the department  28 February 2022 The fact that the Gauteng Premier, David Makhura has publicly admitted that the Department of Infrastructure Development and Property Management (DID) is failing and yet vows to keep the department and not to fire the MEC is an insult to the people of Gauteng whose money continues to be wasted by this incompetent and incapable department. In his recent State of the Province Address, Premier Makhura admitted that the inability of Gauteng to complete infrastructure projects on time and within budget has had a negative impact on service delivery and job creation in the province. The DA feels vindicated after applying pressure for years to get the administration to admit that it is not providing value for money infrastructure and to take remedial action. We care about the wastage and inefficiency which costs taxpayers dearly. Several schools and clinics remain incomplete years after construction has started, costing taxpayers millions of rands more than intended. A lack of skill and expertise in Gauteng’s Department of Infrastructure Development (GDID) and its inability to provide quality maintenance has resulted in a loss to the fiscus as well as a huge backlog in the provision of social infrastructure. This inefficiency kills the hope that exists that Health and Education contribute positively to redressing the ills of the past. Examples of projects that were initiated years ago but are still incomplete include: Mayibuye Primary School initiated in 2015 Braamfischerville Primary School initiated in 2017 Boikhutsong CDC initiated in 2017 Kekanastad Clinic initiated in 2018 Sebokeng Zone 17 Clinic was initiated in 2017 Khutsong South Clinic initiated in 2016 Johannesburg FPS Lab initiated in 2016 Chris Hani Baragwanath was initiated in 2018. The Premier announced in his SOPA speech that other infrastructure providers from the public sector will be drafted in to take over failing projects from GDID. He was referring to national departments as well as entities such as the DBSA. The DA will continue to demand that Premier David Makhura dissolves DID as a matter of urgency and ensures that each department is responsible for its own infrastructure projects. The DA will also be tabling a motion in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature (GPL) demanding the dissolution of the DID. This will ensure that all our infrastructure projects are completed on time and within budget and taxpayers get value for money. Issued by Alan Fuchs, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC For Infrastructure Development, 28 February 2022