SAMA welcomes Cabinet’s announcement of changes to Adjusted Alert Level 1 COVID-19 regulation 3 February 2022 The South African Medical Association (SAMA) says it broadly welcomes Cabinet’s announcement of changes to Adjusted Alert Level 1 COVID-19 regulations. The Association says a substantial number of people have been exposed to COVID-19, either knowingly or unknowingly, and as such have developed a natural immunity. “Cabinet has taken a proactive step to reduce restrictions which, in our view, is the correct way forward. Our country is no longer at the same level of threat it was previously and, as such, it makes sense that limitations are eased. In addition, while the vaccination campaign has tended to taper down recently, this has contributed significantly to the emerging picture, which is extremely encouraging,” says Dr Angelique Coetzee, Chairperson of SAMA. Despite this, notes Dr Coetzee, healthcare professionals and the public should minimize their risk of contracting COVID-19 by maintaining non-pharmaceutical protocols such as social distancing and regular hand sanitizing. SAMA does, however, note that the requirements for social distancing have been eased for schools. “Due to a lack of schools the Department of Education has now had to abandon good practice relating to social distancing to accommodate children returning to schools. If this problem of capacity had been addressed years ago when it was first raised, schools would not be in this unfortunate position. Our hope, however, is that sanitation issues such as running water and flush toilets will be considered as vital in all schools, and slated for priority implementation in those schools that don’t already have these basic facilities,” notes Dr Coetzee. Dr Coetzee adds that although many measures have now been eased, SAMA still urges everyone to get vaccinated, and for those already vaccinated to receive their booster shots. “Our goal should always be high rates of prevention through vaccination. Although infections are showing a downward trend, we cannot allow vaccination and booster rates to decrease,” concludes Dr Coetzee. Issued by Simonia Magardie, Head of PR & Communications, SAMA, 3 February 2022