SADTU Free State condemns the attack of a teacher by parents 4 February 2022 The South African Democratic Teachers’ Union (SADTU) in the Free State condemns, in the strongest terms, the attack of a teacher at Setjhaba Semaketse Secondary School in Botshabelo on the 3rd of January 2022 by his Grade 11 learner and her two parents. The teacher sustained injuries and his laptop – a tool he uses to enhance his work and prepares the lessons for the same learners - was damaged during the attack. We applaud the South African Police Service for their prompt response which led to the arrest of the culprit who will soon appear in court. We have full confidence in our law enforcement and that justice will prevail. We call on SADTU members to be calm and allow due processes to unfold. It is unfortunate that this barbaric act happened during the time when the province is celebrating the achievement of matric results of 2021. There is no justification for attack of any person in schools irrespective of how offended the parent or member of community can be against a teacher. Education is a societal issue and parents are a critical component of the society. They should be at the forefront of protecting schools and teachers as we build the nation. As SADTU we have always called the Department of Education to tighten security in schools to prevent such incidents from happening. It was reported that the parents deceived the security at the gate by pretending to be having a matter to address in relation to their child’s work. This incident happened in the presence of learners and teachers; we commend the colleagues of the teacher who came to his rescue. We call for the counselling of learners, support staff and teachers as a matter of urgency. We call on the Department of Education to move with speed in ensuring that the post of the principal at the school - that has been vacant for two years since the incumbent retired - is filled. Through SADTU’s “I am a school fan” campaign, we are mobilising the learners, teachers, support staff, community, and every stakeholder in education to join hands in ensuring that schools are safe havens. The campaign will be cascaded to all our branches between February 2022 and April 2022. Issued by Moloi Mokholoane, Provincial Secretary, SADTU FS, 4 February 2022