EFF statement on resolution of 24th War Council 10 February 2021 The EFF held its 24th War Council Meeting, of the 2nd National People's Assembly to appraise itself on the recommendations of the 3rd Annual Plenum and prevailing organisational objectives. The War Council of the EFF, met in the City of Cape Town and resolved on a decisive Program of Action for the year which has been resolved as the Year of the Branch. Amongst others, the emphasis on a national Public Recruitment Campaign, towards reaching a membership of 1-million by the end of 2022 was reiterated. A clear breakdown of targets by each region and Province has been laid down and will be monitored by Members of the Central Command Team to ensure the objectives are achieved. As the only alternative to a rotten and corrupt government, the War Council of the EFF has adopted a Program of Action which is in the context of the continued war for Economic Freedom in our Lifetime. These programs include some of the following; a) Considering the high levels of unemployment in the country, particularly amongst the youth, there will be a March for Jobs in Joe Morolong Local Municipality in the Northern Cape, to demand jobs from the private sector for the community, the youth and the poor. b) Understanding the permanent underdevelopment of the continent, and the threat to South Africa's sovereign development and economic policy, we will engage in public campaigns against continued dependency by South Africa on loans from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. c) In order to register our disdain of the arrival of white-settlers in South Africa on the 6th of April 1652, which is the day when the problems of Africans began, the EFF will engage in a direct confrontation with Johann Rupert, by marching to the stolen land he claims to own in the Western Cape and Mpumalanga. As part of demanding the exit of all colonial forces and influences in the continent, the EFF will in Africa Month demand that the French desist from micro-managing the affairs of African states. We will do this by marching to their embassy here in South Africa. The EFF's commitment to an internationalist character will be furthered through a massive demonstration against the despotic monarchy in Eswatini on the birthday of the perverted King Mswati, and by hosting a International Continental Summit, to craft a meaningful socialist agenda in order to topple global imperialism. The War Council further deliberated on plans to host the 9th Anniversary of the EFF in the Western Cape, where those who conquered South Africa first set their sails. It is in the Western Cape where white racism thrives, and as an organisation opposed to white-supremacy in all of its manifestations, the EFF will celebrate 9-years of fighting racism at the seat of white power. The EFF will dip its flag in honour of the slain Mineworkers of Marikana, by observing the 10th Anniversary of the Marikana Massacre with all progressive forces at the Koppie where concomitant action was executed against our people, under the instruction of the sitting President. The continued growth of the EFF was acknowledged, and plans to renew the mandate of all Provincial Structures have been put in place, as well as guidelines for all Provincial People's Assemblies. These will be communicated in due course to structures of the organisation Further to this, in order to entrench organisational growth, the War Council deliberated on redeployments of Officials and Commissars across Provinces, and these resolutions will be communicated intemally. The EFF will launch the Mass Recruitment Program, towards 1-million members, on the 18th of February 2022 in Soweto, as a measure of kickstarting the campaign which will be characterised by public recruitments and inductions. After considering redeployments in terms of Departmental Heads, the War Council resolved to deploy Commissar Sinawo Thambo as the National Spokesperson, as well as Commissar Leigh-Anne Mathys as a National Spokesperson. This resolution is effective immediately. Commissar Vuyani Pambo has been redeployed as the Head of Presidency in the EFF. All structures will be appraised of resolutions formally in due course, particularly regarding the revolutionary Programs of Action in defence of the people and toward reclaiming the land! Hasta La Victoria Siempre! Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 10 February 2022