DA submits complaint to SAHRC on Msunduzi Water Crisis 17 February 2022 The Democratic Alliance in the Msunduzi Local Municipality has submitted an urgent complaint to the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC) requesting an urgent investigation and intervention into the ongoing water outages in the municipality (view here). According to Section 27 (1) (b) of the South African Constitution, the right of access to sufficient water is accorded to everyone. In accordance with this, Msunduzi Municipality continues to fail in provision of this fundamental human right. Msunduzi Municipality has been beset by crippling, frequent water outages that span hours to days due to inadequate and ill-maintained water infrastructure. There are also concerns that contractors employed by the municipality may too be sabotaging water infrastructure to rack up exorbitant fees. In large areas of Pietermaritzburg, water outages are now a daily occurrence. In parts of Mafakathini, DA oversight revealed that some communities have been without water for 9 years. These water outages have significantly decreased the quality of life for residents in the municipality, especially vulnerable sickly and elderly residents, whilst undermining the local economy. The situation has become dire and requires immediate intervention. As it stands, Msunduzi Municipality is under extended administration in accordance with Section 139 (1) b of the constitution due to severe financial mismanagement and corruption. The municipal leadership, including the allocated Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA) administrator, have failed to resuscitate this municipality back from the brink of collapse. The present infrastructure maintenance budget which should have prioritised the maintenance of basic infrastructure, stands at a paltry 3% of total budget. The dereliction of duty constitutes gross negligence on the part of the municipal leadership and the COGTA administrator who were well aware of the unfolding crisis in water supply. We call on the Human Rights Commission to urgently investigate the water crisis in Msunduzi Municipality. We can no longer allow residents to endure indefinite water outages – access to water is the right of every South African. The DA will continue to fight for services for the residents of Msunduzi. Issued by Hannah Shameema Winkler, DA Msunduzi Constituency Head, 17 February 2022