MAYOR PHALATSE CLARIFIES POSITION IN RESPECT OF GENERAL SIBIYA INVESTIGATION 12 July 2022 I have taken note of recent media articles that published allegations of protection afforded to the former Head of the City of Johannesburg’s Group Forensic and Investigation Service (GFIS), General Shadrack Sibiya. These allegations are scurrilous and devoid of truth. A former Acting City Manager, who was facing disciplinary action, chose to make these allegations in the run up to a Council meeting that subjected him to investigation. The allegations came out of the blue and were seen in the context of a fight back campaign that had been waged by the former Acting City Manager over several months. Accordingly, I used my powers to seek a legal opinion. This opinion cast huge doubts on the report commissioned by the former Acting City Manager. However, I took note of the seriousness of the allegations, and my Office was in constant contact with the State Security Agency (SSA) to get them to either confirm the allegations or otherwise indicate that the equipment being used was being done so lawfully. To date, we are waiting for their report despite providing information requested by them, twice, and despite several reminders to the Agency that we are awaiting their report. Moreover, the new Acting City Manager has assigned independent investigators to test the veracity of the allegations in respect of the equipment being used. This is in parallel to the long-awaited SSA investigation report. General Sibiya’s employment fell within a category that requires the City Manager to act in these matters. A report to Council only becomes due when the City Manager’s process concludes. This will be provided at that time. Until due processes have been concluded in this matter, I will not be commenting further, in order to give space and time for processes to advance without fear, favour or prejudice. Statement issued by Mabine Seabe, Director: Mayoral Communication, Private Office of the Executive Mayor, City of Johannesburg, 12 July 2022 