Investigate Bheki Cele for allegations of interference with awarding contracts 9 July 2022 The allegations by Lt-Gen Francinah Vuma, Deputy National Police Commissioner, that the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, spent R5,5 million in police money on, among other things, travelling to Dubai and that he also used police money, without authorisation, to pay for his court cases are serious and must be thoroughly investigated. Minister Cele must respond to these allegations as soon as possible. It is very clear that the faction fights in the police's top management did not come to an end when the former National Police Commissioner, Gen Khehla Sitole, was removed from the position. At the time, I warned that the consequences of these internal faction fights could have a very negative impact on the fight against crime. Nothing, however, changed and now it seems as if the current National Commissioner, Gen Fannie Masemola, is Minister Cele's lapdog and that they are actively furthering their own agenda. Serious action must be taken to settle these internal disputes. If not, the police service will keep declining and ultimately, the ones who will bear the brunt are the people of South Africa, as they will increasingly be affected by crime. Minister Cele's conduct has been controversial for quite some time now. During his term as National Commissioner, the former Public Protector (PP), Adv Thuli Madonsela, implicated him in her report in the irregular awarding of an inflated lease contract of R1,5 billion to Mr Roux Shabangu. He was stripped of his office as Commissioner for that very reason, but was then appointed as the Minister of Police. According to the allegations of Lt-Gen Vuma, it seems that Minister Cele has once again interfered with the awarding of contracts to certain service providers. It is nothing but corruption and state capture. I will request Parliament's Portfolio Committee on Police to launch a thorough investigation into the matter. I will also ask President Cyril Ramaphosa in writing to appoint a judicial commission to investigate the allegations of corruption. If there is one place where corruption cannot be tolerated, it is the police service. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 9 July 2022