News: Two suspects fatally shot and 65 arrested during a multi-disciplinary operation in Krugersdorp 2022/07/29 PARKTOWN - On Friday, 29 July 2022, the Provincial Commissioner of Police in Gauteng, Lieutenant General Elias Mawela led a multi-disciplinary team of law enforcement agencies and security companies following an alleged incident of gang rape and armed robbery where a production company’s crew was allegedly attacked in Krugersdorp, West Village on Thursday, 28 July 2022. The operation which was also joined by the Executive Mayor of Mogale City, Counsellor Tyrone Gray and his team resulted in the arrest of 65 suspects for contravention of the Immigration Act, including one that is hospitalised for gunshot treatment. Two more suspects were fatally shot after allegedly pointing firearms during police operations. Two unlicensed firearms, explosives as well as other items that belong to the victims have since been recovered. It is reported that on 28 July 2022 in the afternoon, the crew of 22 people (12 women and 10 men), were busy filming a music video when they were allegedly attacked by a group of armed men clad in blankets. The suspects ordered everyone to lay down and proceeded to rape eight of the women and robbed everyone of their belongings before fleeing the scene. The multi-disciplinary team comprised of officials from Crime Intelligence, Special Task Force, National Intervention Unit, Tactical Response Team, K9, Flying Squad, Highway Patrol, SAPS Airwing and Tracker helicopter as well as Department of Home Affairs and other private security stakeholders. The Airwing and the deployment of drone technology were assisting the ground forces to track the fleeing suspects. The Family Violence, Child Protection and Sexual Offences is investigating 32 counts of rape following the rape of the eight women as well as a case of armed robbery. While police continue with operations, members of the public are encouraged to report knowledge of any criminal activities by calling the SAPS Crime Stop toll free number 08600 10111 or to send tip-offs via MySAPS Application which can downloaded on any smartphone. Statement issued by Brigadier Brenda Muridili, South African Police Service, Office of the Provincial Commissioner Gauteng, 29 July 2022