Press Council of South Africa appoints new Press Ombud 8 July 2022 Mr Herman Scholtz has been appointed South Africa’s Press Ombud, effective from 1 July 2022, the Press Council of South Africa (PCSA) has announced. Mr Scholtz, an advocate from the Pretoria Society of Advocates and a former journalist, replaces Ms Carmel Rickard, who has resigned for personal reasons. He has been one of the PCSA’s two Deputy Press Ombuds for the past year and has gained significant expertise in adjudicating complaints about breaches of the Press Code of Ethics and Conduct for South African Print and Online media. The Press Ombud and Deputy Press Ombuds serve part-time. Mr Scholtz has been appointed after a rigorous search by the PCSA Appointments Panel and after the position was widely advertised. Judge Bernard Ngoepe, who chaired the panel in the absence of its regular chairperson, Judge Yvonne Mokgoro, said the Panel had considered 48 applicants which had been reduced to a shortlist of four. He said: “We were highly impressed by Herman’s understanding and application of the Press Code, and his experience in the adjudication of complaints. “Herman demonstrated an advanced understanding of bringing the Press Code to bear in complex adjudications. It helped that he was already ‘in the system’ and understood the challenges and particular pressures which came with the Office. “The Panel came away with a distinct impression that over and above Herman’s technical ability to perform the role to a high level of efficiency, he would also provide the necessary leadership in being a face of the Press Council along with the requisite level of legitimacy in the eyes of both the public and the media. “We believe that Herman has a unique set of skills, having both newsroom and legal training, which make him an excellent choice for the role.” Mr Scholtz said he was delighted to be appointed. “I am humbled by the opportunity to contribute to the important work of the Press Council of South Africa. A thriving, independent, and responsible South African media sector is more important than ever. To maintain the media’s integrity, accountability to the public is vital and the work of the PCSA indispensable.” Mr Scholtz is an advocate with a general litigation practice and a special interest in media and censorship law. Prior to joining the Bar, he had direct newsroom experience for over a decade, and served as the national News and Business Editor of Rapport. During his career in journalism, he covered diverse fields including healthcare, business news, the economy, courts, legal affairs, crime and politics. He holds a postgraduate degree in journalism from Stellenbosch University and an LLM degree in Information and Communications Law from the University of the Witwatersrand – both obtained with distinction. He has spent years as a legal adviser to the National Press Club and as a part-time lecturer in media law and social media law. Issued by Latiefa Mobara, Executive Director of the Press Council of SA, 8 July 2022