Special Investigating Unit refutes allegations that KZN proclamations are “dirty politics” 27 July 2022 The Special Investigating Unit (SIU) has noted with concern an Independent Media article that was published on Wednesday, 27 July 2022, under the headline: “SIU probe in KwaZulu-Natal ‘dirty politics’. The headline and the article are misleading the public and is not based on facts. Therefore, the SIU refutes, with the contempt that it deserves, the inference that that it is being used as a political tool by anyone.The SIU work independently without any fear, favour or prejudice. All our investigations are allegation based as we get the allegation from whistleblowers. It is therefore very clear that we need to explain the proclamation process. When the SIU receives the allegations from the whistleblowers, it goes through a vigorous process of assessment done in accordance with the legislation.Once the SIU is convinced that there is merit in the allegation, we then draft a proclamation that is taken through the process leading to the signing of the Proclamation by the President as required by law. It must also be noted that after the President signs the proclamation, the proclamation still have to be gazetted. In this case, these proclamations were gazetted on the 22nd July 2022. It is therefore concerning that, of the 14 government departments that the SIU has been authorized to investigate in the current proclamations; only four are in KwaZulu Natal (KZN). These investigations include the provincial department of health, like all other provinces, the KZN transport department, the Newcastle Local Municipality and the procurement of blankets at the KZN’s South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) office, the article only singles out the KZN.We are investigating multiple government departments, institutions and State entities all over the country. KZN is not singled out in our investigations. It is incorrect to link the need and duty to investigate allegations of corruption and administration to politics. As the SIU, we have committed to the public that we will assess and investigate every allegation that is reported to the SIU without fear, favour or prejudice. Issued by Kaizer Kganyago, Head of Stakeholder Relations and Communications (SIU), 27 July 2022  