DA protests against draconian BELA Bill, demands Lesufi denounce Bill 5 July 2022 Note to Editors: Please find attached English soundbite by Baxolile ‘Bax’ Nodada MP, and Afrikaans soundbite by Desiree van der Walt MP, as well as pictures here, here, here, here and here. Today, the DA protested against the draconian Basic Education Laws Amendment (BELA) Bill and handed a memorandum to the office of the Gauteng MEC of Education, Panyaza Lesufi. The DA has numerous concerns with the BELA Bill, as outlined in our formal submissions to the parliamentary portfolio committee on basic education. The Bill, and the ‘Lesufi clauses’ in particular, seeks to disempower school governing bodies (SGBs) by removing their power to ultimately decide their schools’ language and admissions policies. It further fails to address the effective regulation of blended and online learning; fails to engage properly with the home schooling sector to determine accountability measures to ensure quality education; and fails to take into account the financial, human resources and infrastructure impacts of compulsory grade R education. The DA demands that: Lesufi publicly retract his support for the BELA Bill; Lesufi must put pressure on the Department of Basic Education, and the Minister of Basic Education, Angie Motshekga, to withdraw the Bill from Parliament; Lesufi must publicly denounce and distances himself from the BELA Bill, in particular clauses 4 and clause 5 which aims to take power away from parents on language and admission policies; Lesufi must publicly retract and apologise for his attack on single medium- and mother tongue education; Lesufi must publicly retract and apologises for his attack, racialisation, and stigmatisation of especially Afrikaans as an indigenous language; Lesufi must publicly retract his attack on Afrikaans as a language, which is spoken as a first language by 77% of the coloured population; and Lesufi must recognise democratic processes and hear the voices of millions of South Africans who are opposed to this Bill. The DA will do everything in our power to ensure that children are empowered through empowering their SGBs. All children deserve quality education. It is time Lesufi, Minister Motshekga and her Department focused on addressing the serious concerns plaguing the basic education sector instead of trying to centralise power and bully schools and SGBs that want the best for their children and communities. The Department must address the following serious concerns: The sector is facing high learner drop-out rates; Infrastructure is dilapidated with too many mud and asbestos buildings and pit toilets remaining; and Poor quality teaching due to the unions’ strangle hold. We call on the public to submit their concerns in writing to Llewellyn Brown, the secretary of the parliamentary portfolio committee via email to belabill02@parliament.gov.za or online at https://forms.gle/MoC6AdbdQyYPk3Y49 or via WhatsApp: +27 60 550 9848 by no later than 15 August 2022 at 16:00. Text of memorandum: Memorandum of Demands: Handed over to Mr Panyaza Lesufi 05 July 2022 Mr Baxolile Nodada, MP Shadow Minister of Basic Education Democratic Alliance MEMORANDUM OF DEMANDS 05 JULY 2022 FROM: TO: Democratic Alliance Official Opposition in Parliament Mr Panyaza Lesufi MEC for Education in Gauteng We, the Democratic Alliance, are the Official Opposition in Parliament and demand the following with immediate effect: Mr Lesufi must publicly retract his support for the BELA Bill Mr Lesufi must put pressure on the Department of Basic Education, and the Minister of Basic Education to withdraw the Bill from Parliament Mr Lesufi must publicly denounce and distances himself from the BELA Bill, in particular clauses 4 and clause 5 which aims to take power away from parents on language and admission policies Mr Lesufi must publicly retract and apologise for his attack on single medium- and mother tongue education Mr Lesufi must publicly retract and apologises for his attack, racialisation, and stigmatisation of especially Afrikaans as an indigenous language Mr Lesufi must publicly retract his attack on Afrikaans as a language which is spoken as a first language by 77% of the coloured population Mr Lesufi must recognise democratic processes and hear the voices of millions of South Africans who are opposed to this Bill. DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE 05 JULY 2022 1.  Background: The Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill (BELA) was introduced into the National Assembly on 10 January 2022. This bill unashamedly seeks to, amongst other things, increase the extent of the influence of the politicians in the daily activities of the education sector. Under the BELA Bill, the head of provincial education departments and MECs like Mr Panyaza Lesufi will ultimately decide: · what language is taught in your child’s school; and · who is admitted to the school. Parents, and School Governing Bodies (SGBs), will lose these powers. This bill takes power away from communities and into the hands of politicians. This bill will fundamentally damage our public education sector. We, the Democratic Alliance, condemn the proposed bill and its attack on the local authority of schools. 2.  Public perception: The draconian BELA Bill has received widespread criticism from the public. To date, more than 17 000 people have submitted their comments on the BELA Bill and more than 13 000 people have signed the DA’s Afrikaans and English petitions opposing the Bill. Different civil society organisations, education experts and student governing bodies have also spoken out against the bill. The sentiment of the public is thus clear: The vast majority of South Africans do not support the BELA Bill. It is therefore very concerning that, considering South Africa is a country founded upon democratic principles, the governing party is steamrolling ahead with its plans for the bill to be adopted, despite the public’s clear wishes for it not to be. Accordingly, we are very concerned about the continued ignorant support of government for this fundamentally flawed Bill. Mr. Lesufi is one such a leader. He as openly displayed his support for the BELA Bill and is outspoken about his disdain for single medium- and mother tongue education. 3.  Main concerns of BELA Bill: The DA has submitted our comments on the Basic Education Laws Amendment (BELA) Bill, and encourages the public to submit their concerns to Parliament. The DA will continue to fight the BELA Bill through especially the Parliamentary channels. Our main concerns are: 1. Clause 2 – Making Grade R Compulsory The DA supports the intention of making Grade R mandatory as this year serves as an important developmental tool. While it is commendable that the Department wishes to extend grade R to all learners, there are serious practical concerns surrounding whether the schooling system will be able to cope with the influx in student demand. There are already shortages in teachers and inadequacies relating to school infrastructure across our schooling system. We do not believe the school system can admit such a large number of new Grade R learners at present. There will be a need for significant financial investment to expand Grade R classroom capacity and to employ additional teaching staff across the country. We request that government first implement proper plans to ensure that scarcity of resources does not affect the adequate implementation of this aim, and simultaneously that the cost of implementing this provision is not overly burdensome on our already constrained fiscus. 2.      Clause 4 – Admissions Policies The DA opposes this clause as it will put the final decision of school admission policies into the hands of the Head of Department, with appeals being allowed to the MEC. We believe that local communities should have the right to determine their own school admissions policies as they will have the greatest grasp of their own needs. The DA believes that the requirement that all admissions policies be sent to the Head of Department for approval within 30 days of the Bill coming into force, and with approvals being required within 60 days is far too great of an administrative burden and should be removed. The DA believes that the power to determine admissions policies must remain with school governing bodies, and a suitable appeal mechanism be left in place to provide for adequate recourse in instances where a school abuses their right to determine admissions policies so as to exclude certain learners. Furthermore, the DA believes that the proposed intergovernmental committee which aims to assist schools in obtaining the required documentation for learners admitted without this documentation is a waste of resources. The Department of Basic Education should not have to compensate for the failure of the Department of Home Affairs to perform their basic mandate. 3.      Clause 5 - Language Policies Clause 5 of the Bill requires that a school governing body must submit the language policy of any public school and any amendment thereof to the Head of Department for approval. The DA believes that this clause may be abused to force single language schools to change thei language policies. We also believe that the administrative burden placed on the Head of Department to approve all language policies will be prohibitive. Furthermore, the current timeline of 14 days for an appeal decision from the MEC is too short for any meaningful engagement with the issues of the appeal to have been conducted. The DA submits that language policy decisions should remain with school governing bodies, and an appropriate appeal mechanism be established to provide adequate recourse when problems may arise. 4.  Clause 19 – Power of the Minister to Determine the Number of School Governing Body Members, and their Manner of Election at Public Schools for Learners with Special Needs The DA opposes this transferral of power as it amounts to an unjustified intrusion on the affairs of the provinces and constitutes an unnecessary centralisation of power within government. The DA believes this power should remain with the MEC rather than the Minister. 5.  Clause 21 – Dissolution of a School Governing Body by the Head of Department This section provides that in instances where a school governing body has been dissolved by the HoD, any appeal against this decision must be decided within 14 days after receiving the appeal. The DA believes this timeline is unrealistic and should be extended. 6.  Clause 37 – Home Schooling This clause provides that parents of a home-schooled child must apply to the Head of Department to register their learner, as well as the requiring additional assessments of a child’s educational attainment up to the age of 15 or grade 9. A delegated official may also be required to perform a pre-registration home education site visit. While the DA believes that there must be accountability measures in place to ensure home schools provide quality education standards, there is a need for greater consultation with the home schooling-sector to determine their views, and to consider their concerns with this clause. 7.      Regulation of Online and Blended learning The DA believes the Basic Education Laws Amendment Bill is missing an opportunity to effectively regulate online and blended learning. These forms of schooling are likely to grow in popularity in the near future. There is a need effectively regulate these new forms of learning so as to alleviate the pressure on existing physical schooling systems. 4. Demands to Mr Lesufi: As such we, the Democratic Alliance (DA), reiterate our demands that: Mr Lesufi must publicly retract his support for the BELA Bill Mr Lesufi must put pressure on the Department of Basic Education, and the Minister of Basic Education to withdraw the Bill from Parliament Mr Lesufi must publicly denounce and distances himself from the BELA Bill, in particular clauses 4 and clause 5 which aims to take power away from parents on language and admission policies Mr Lesufi must publicly retract and apologise for his attack on single medium- and mother tongue education Mr Lesufi must publicly retract and apologises for his attack, racialisation, and stigmatisation of especially Afrikaans as an indigenous language Mr Lesufi must publicly retract his attack on Afrikaans as a language which is spoken as a first language by 77% of the coloured population Mr Lesufi must recognise democratic processes and hear the voices of millions of South Africans who are opposed to this Bill. The BELA Bill, if adopted, will significantly alter the educational landscape of South Africa by ensuing irreparable damage on our schools and the lives of our youth, to the detriment of the entire country. Democratic Alliance 05 July 2022 Issued by Bax Nodada & Desiree van der Walt, DA, 5 July 2022