Eskom and labour unions reach agreement on wage talks 5 July 2022 Eskom is pleased to announce that it has this afternoon reached an agreement on the 2022 wage talks with the three recognised labour unions. This brings the Central Bargaining Forum (CBF) talks and the damaging, disruptive and costly wage dispute to an end, paving the way for a full return to work of all employees. A 7% salary across the board increase for all the employees covered in the CBF will be applied for the year starting 01 July 2022 to 30 June 2023. For this period the housing allowance will increase by R400 per month. With effect from July 2022 Eskom has agreed to re-instate the conditions of service which applied during the agreement in force until 30 June 2021. The overall effect of this agreement on the wage bill will be more than R1 billion over the period of the agreement. This of course will be a struggle for Eskom to afford. It is important to note that while the workforce is returning to work, the system will still take some time to recover. As a result of the strike, maintenance work has had to be postponed, and this backlog will take time to clear. Following this agreement, the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) and Solidarity have urged their members to return to work immediately. Eskom also wishes to urge all employees to return to their workstations immediately to relieve the pressure on the system and to deliver the service the people of South Africa expect from Eskom, and to assist in restoring generation performance negatively impacted by the unlawful strike. Eskom would like to pay tribute to and thank those many employees who keep going beyond the call of duty and continue to make personal sacrifices to help the keep the lights on during this very challenging time. We also wish to thank the members of the SA Police Services who played a key role in ensuring that disruptions of law and order were minimised at power stations during the strike. Issued by Eskom Media Desk *** NUM signed a 1-year wage agreement with Eskom The National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) today signed a one-year wage agreement on behalf of its members at Eskom.  The wage agreement makes provision for a 7% wage increase for workers across the board. Scope and Duration The agreement shall apply from 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023 Salaries The salary increase will be 7% across the board Condition of service Eskom agrees to reinstate the changes to conditions of service which existed as at 30 June 2021 with effect from 01 July 2022 Housing allowance The housing allowance will increase by R400 for the period of 01 July 2022 to 30 June 2023 2021 Dispute of CCMA on Condition of Services It is proposed that the dispute dealing with conditions of service be withdrawn and only deal with the dispute on salary increase, unilateral implementation and refusal to bargain. Disciplinary Procedure, Grievance Procedure and Recognition Agreement A task team will be established consisting of at least three persons from each party. The task team will report back to the CBF within three months. The NUM wishes to express its sincere gratitude to its members at Eskom for the manner in which they behaved during the negotiation period up until they gave us a mandate to sign the agreement. Issued by Livhuwani Mammburu, National Spokesperson, NUM *** NUMSA signs the wage proposal with Eskom The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) met with other unions, and the Eskom management as part of the Central Bargaining Forum (CBF). We met after collecting the mandate from all workers in all regions. The mandate from our members was to accept the wage proposal. It is broken down as follows: Duration of Agreement The agreement shall apply from 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023 to all permanent bargaining unit employees employed at Eskom. Salaries The salary increase is 7% across the board. Conditions of Service Eskom agrees to re-instate the changes to conditions of service, which existed as at 30 June 2021, with effect from 1 July 2022. Housing Allowance The housing allowance will increase by R400.00 for the period 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023. As NUMSA we are pleased to have finally resolved this round of wage talks, particularly given the difficult circumstances that we faced. The conditions of service which were unilaterally withdrawn, and which caused so much pain to our members, have been restored. We have also secured an improvement from last year, after Eskom imposed 1.5%. We want to thank the negotiating team for their tireless efforts in finding a solution. NUMSA will always fight to improve conditions of the working class. Aluta continua! The struggle continues! Issued by Irvin Jim, General Secretary, NUMSA, 5 July 2022