Lesufi’s constant attacks on Afrikaans institutions prove that ANC is down to the dregs when it comes to leadership 27 July 2022 The FF Plus views the latest attack on Afrikaans institutions by the Gauteng MEC for Education, Panyaza Lesufi, as the umpteenth incident proving that the ANC is down to the dregs and has no leaders left who can act as true leaders and statesmen for the people of Gauteng. The FF Plus considers it an utter disgrace that a racial demagogue and blatant Afrikaans-hater has been elected to the leadership of the ANC in Gauteng and is, on top of that, standing as a premier candidate in the general elections of 2024. The FF Plus's response was elicited by a media conference held by Lesufi at the end of June where he, among other things, openly attacked the FF Plus and a number of other Afrikaans organisations and institutions. Now it seems that the media conference led to a nasty turn of events as AfriForum sent a letter of demand to Lesufi for defamation and he spitefully posted the letter with remarks on his Twitter page. In the tweet, he, among other things, states that he will not be intimidated nor bullied and that he defeated the apartheid regime. His behaviour is ludicrous and speaks of someone who suffers from grandiose delusions, and who clearly does not realise in how much trouble the ANC and the voters, especially in Gauteng, are. Ironically enough, selecting Lesufi as a leader for the ANC in Gauteng also speaks of this party's moral bankruptcy. Gauteng is a diverse province with different cultures and language groups that all truly want a better life and equal opportunities. In nearly 30 years, the ANC could not succeed in governing the province so that its economy offers most people job opportunities, instead, the party busies itself – through Lesufi – with senseless attacks on racism ghosts where there are none, like in the case of Hoërskool Overvaal and Hoërskool Jan Viljoen. What Lesufi apparently does not realise is that most people in Gauteng are not interested in polarising behaviour, but rather want to see behaviour aimed at ensuring quality education for all learners in the province without disadvantaging any language group. The people of Gauteng are also not interested in a potential premier who governs in the interest of some while demonising others. Therefore, the FF Plus will continue to do everything in its power, as part of its "Stop Lesufi" campaign, to ensure that the ANC loses the elections in 2024 to a coalition of constructive parties where the FF Plus will play a leading role. Gauteng deserves better than Lesufi. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus national chairperson and MPL: Gauteng, 27 July 2022