BBC expectations from the African National Congress Policy Conference  29 July 2022 As the African National Congress (ANC) holds its Policy Conference, the Black Business Council (BBC) performed an analysis of the 2017 conference resolutions and realised that a lot of policies have not been fully executed or their impact have yet to be felt on the broader economy. The BBC caution against the inclination of the state spreading itself too thin by having too many focus areas that are not matched by existing resources. The BBC expects the focus to be on practical implementable policies: Implementable and visible Socio-Economic Transformation policies that will completely change the patterns of economic ownership (in all sectors of the economy) and practically reduce market concentration, create jobs, inequality, sustainable reduce unemployment and poverty. Mainstreaming of the creative industry as a key economic sector that has the capacity to intersect with the arts, tourism and entertainment industries. Visible access to finance support to Small, Medium and Micro Enterprises (SMMEs) owned by blacks, women, youth and people living with disabilities by pulling all Enterprise Development funds into one fund similar to the Solidarity Fund. By utilising state procurement, Government must consciously set aside procurement for opportunities black entities and professionals, in order to bring them into the mainstream economy. Economic Reset through massive infrastructure rollout and repositioning of Development Finance Institutions. Finding lasting and permanent solutions to loadshedding and blackouts by addressing base load. Conference must also take a decisive action against the incapacity of the Eskom Board and Management. Reviving localisation and manufacturing — what were once a thriving, high-employment sector. Conference should emerge with clear programmes for re-industrialisation. As the BBC, we remain committed to working with government and other social partners to find solutions for the challenges faced by our country. When policies are executed consistently and speedily, the benefits associated with the policy vision should result in better outcomes for society. Issued by BBC, 29 July 2022