EFF demands that Cyril Ramaphosa answer the 31 questions posed to him by the Office of the Public Protector 18 July 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) demands that Cyril Ramaphosa responds to the 31 questions posed to him by the Office of the Public Protector, after he was reported for having possibly breached the Executive Members Ethics Act, by laundering money, kidnapping and concealing a crime. On the 8th of June 2022, the Public Protector Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane sent Ramaphosa 31 questions relating to the crimes which occurred and emanated from Phala Phala farm. A day later, she was suspended by the cowardly Ramaphosa, who proceeded to secure a baseless extension to respond to the questions from Acting Public Protector Kholeka Gcaleka. That extension, based on the Ankole-trading hustler's so-called busy schedule, was granted. Ramaphosa received an extension to respond to the questions on the 18th of July 2022, which is today. The EFF therefore calls on Ramaphosa, to desist from trying to portray himself as a victim of bullying and intimidation, and respond to the clear and direct questions regarding Phala Phala. His attempts at creating a smoke-screen that there is a witch hunt against him are failing dismally, in the face of coherent and logical interrogation by the public. We do not doubt that Ramaphosa is unable to answer the questions of the Public Protector because he has no credible and moral explanation for what led to him hiding millions of dollars under a mattress, failing to report the theft of this money and then proceeding to abduct and torture suspects to retrieve it. The revelations that National Commissioner of Police Fannie Masemola used a police helicopter and a communications interception device to track suspects, even though no crime was reported to law enforcement agencies, gives credence to our belief that Ramaphosa is delaying because he is guilty. Ramaphosa must provide clear responses to the 31-questions posed to him today! Failure to do so must be a confirmation that this tax-evading criminal, undermines the rule of law and the Constitution of South Africa, and must be removed. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 18 July 2022