AfriForum and Traditional Communities promote sustainable co-existence  29 July 2022 AfriForum and representatives of the office of iNkosi (chief) Zwelothando Mabandla of the AmaBhele kaJamangile Traditional Community and the office of Kgosi (chief) Gabo Moroka of the Barolong Boo Seleka Traditional Community, visited Orania with the aim of the promoting intercultural dialogue, peaceful co-existence and acceptance of diverse cultural identities. These two traditional communities are already promoting agricultural development and a culture of self-sufficiency in their communities and utilised this opportunity to see how Orania operates as a community that promotes self-sufficiency. Kgosi Gabo Moroka was recognised as Motshwaredi (regent) of the Barolong Boo Seleka Traditional Community last month after a decade long leadership battle. A joint agricultural project at the Noga’s Post Village of Thaba ’Nchu already harvested its first crop. “Robert Alan wrote: Cultural differences should not separate us from each other, but rather cultural diversity brings a collective strength that can benefit all of humanity. Together we stand stronger in finding solutions to build a future we all wish for, and together we shall stand to ensure our communities thrive and progress. The Bible says: Peter said, “I really am learning that God doesn’t show partiality to one group of people over another. Rather, in every nation, whoever worships him and does what is right is acceptable to him.” (Acts 10:34-35) It is time for all of us to do what is right in peace, respect, tolerance and love,” says Kgosi Gabo Moroka, regent of the Barolong Boo Seleka traditional community. The Jamangile kaMabandla Royal Family are already in the process of building a self-sufficient community with security, education, healthcare, recreational and child play facilities. The vision is to build a new smart agri-hood to uplift the community and provide an opportunity for families to be part of a community that is accountable to each other whilst prioritising food security, rural development and poverty alleviation. First steps were recently taken towards the execution of a joint agricultural development project. “It is time to promote dialogue and reconciliation between each other and to build a sustainable future where communities respect each other and co-exist peacefully. The institution of traditional leadership is the structure providing stability in rural areas, this institution also has a role to play in reviving self-sufficiency and autonomy through projects such as the agricultural development project we have undertaken in collaboration with other stakeholders,” says iNkosazana (princess) Bhelekazi Mabandla, Head of Royal Diplomatic Services of the Jamangile kaMabandla Royal Family. “A future where communities thrive will be possible when there is mutual understanding between cultural communities and these communities collaborate in a network on the basis of mutual recognition and respect,” says Barend Uys, Head of Intercultural Relations and Cooperation at AfriForum. “Every outcome achieved starts with a first step. Dialogue, reconciliation and understanding starts with a first conversation. We stepped up to a first conversation and encourages other communities to also do so. We must remember that God’s plans aren’t our plans and our ways are not his ways, we must do what is right and trust Him with the outcomes,” closes iNkosazana Bhelekazi. Issued by Barend Uys, Head: Intercultural Relations and Cooperation, AfriForum, 29 July 2022