NA SPEAKER DECLINES REQUEST TO SET UP AD HOC COMMITTEE ON PHALA PHALA 9 July 2022 Parliament, Saturday 09 July 2022 – National Assembly Speaker, Ms Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula, has declined a request by the Leader of the Official Opposition, Mr John Steenhuisen, to set up an Ad Hoc Committee to investigate allegations of theft at President Cyril Ramaphosa's game farm. Mr Steenhuisen wrote to the Speaker requesting that she establish the Committee in terms of National Assembly Rule 253(1)(b) - which allows for the establishment of such a committee "during the adjournment of the Assembly for a period of more than 14 days, by the Speaker after consulting the Chief Whip and the most senior whip of each of the other parties." In her letter, the Speaker declined the request arguing that Rule 253 sets out requirements for the establishment of an Ad hoc Committee, and one of them is the performance of a specific task. While the request proposes a committee on Phala Phala, it goes on to list various distinct tasks for investigation. In the nature of the proposed investigation, this is understandable. However, some of the tasks proposed are arguably, still within the purview of other entities or institutions, including law enforcement, and may indeed necessitate Parliament's attention in due course. At this stage, the various components raised by Mr Steenhuisen for parliamentary intervention are better suited for attention by the existing Parliamentary oversight structures. The Speaker has also declined the African Transformation Movement's (ATM) motion submitted in accordance with the National Assembly Rule 129A to seek the removal of the President in terms of section 89 of the Constitution. In her letter to Mr Vuyo Zungula of the ATM, the Speaker explained that from reading his submission, she was unable to determine which of the listed grounds in section 89(1) was he relying on. In terms of Rule 129A (1) (a)(i) to (iii), the motion must be limited to a clearly formulated and substantiated charge on the grounds specified in Section 89 of the Constitution. The Speaker has accordingly advised Mr Zungula to ensure clearly formulated grounds on which his motion relies. The services of the Office of Secretary to the NA have in this regard been made available to assist with the technical formulation of the motion, should such assistance be required. Statement issued by Moloto Mothapo, Parliament, 9 July 2022