Captured KZN Office of the Premier sitting on 85 incomplete forensic audits 27 July 2022 A written parliamentary reply by KZN Premier, Sihle Zikalala, (view here) to questions by the DA has exposed that as of March 2022 his office was sitting on 85 incomplete forensic audits into provincial government departments and officials, with some dating back as far as 2014. Further analysis indicates that all 85 investigations are listed as in progress while 39 are long outstanding probes as a result of allegations received before 2020. (view here and here) The information also reveals that KZN’s Department of Transport (DoT) has two audits that commenced eight years ago with a further two – begun six years ago – none of which had been concluded by the end of March. If KZN’s people ever needed further evidence that the ANC in KZN is not committed to rooting out corruption, then this is it. In July 2020, the Premier moved all forensic audits and anti-fraud and corruption services in the province away from the Provincial Treasury to the Office of the Premier (OTP). This after Treasury no longer had the capacity to fulfill this function. Despite this, there has been no progress in ridding our province of this scourge. These latest findings would also seem to support the perception that the decision to move forensic audits to the OTP is a politically-motivated plan aimed at protecting corrupt comrades. Further issues raised within the reply include common reasons for lengthy delays. These include;- Capacity constraints- Complexity of the investigation- Investigation divided into various allegations- Lack of cooperation from client departments- Non-availability of documents and difficulties in tracing witnesses- Poor quality of report from a service provider, and;- Delays with processing for outsourcing The DA has long maintained that this Department is captured and a dumping ground for failed cadres. Not even the Premier and his Department seem willing or able to fast-track these investigations and ensure that they are completed timeously so that corrupt officials face the consequences for their actions. Right now, the Premier’s response triggers more questions than answers and he needs to answer the following:- What are he and his Department doing to address the above issues which are clearly hindering the process?- Have any officials been suspended or axed in the interim as a result of damning evidence?- If so, how long have they been on suspension and were they paid a salary during this period?- How many forensic investigations have been referred to the police for formal prosecution? The DA expects answers to these questions, failing which we will refer the matter to the Public Protector for further investigation. As the highest office in the province, the OTP should lead by example when it comes to accountability and transparency. While the DA congratulates this Office on its recent clean audit, this should also be the norm and not the exception. For as long as KZN’s ANC does not have the political will to deal with corruption, our province will never achieve the ideal of a capable and ethical state and its people will continue to suffer. The 2024 elections will afford the people of KZN the opportunity to elect a DA government with a proven track record of dealing with corruption and accountability. Issued by Francois Rodgers, Leader of the DA in the KZN Legislature, 27 July 2022