ANC statement on the ANC’s response to the State Capture Commission Report 27 July 2022 Before we get into the substance of this media dialogue, we wish to express on behalf of the African National Congress congratulations and well wishes to the players, coaching staff and management of Banyana Banyana for their outstanding triumph in the Women's Africa Cup of Nations. They have earned their position as the Champions of Africa. In recognition of our commitment as a country to the achievement of gender equality, the ANC believes that these players should be paid the same as their male counterparts. We also wish to recognise the great achievement of Prof Tshilidzi Marwala on being appointed to the prestigious position of the Rector of the United Nations University. Whether on the sports field or in academia, these examples of South Africans excelling on the international stage should serve as an inspiration and encouragement to us all. These achievements were made possible by talent, hard work and a deep ambition to succeed. They were also made possible by the opportunities provided to these individuals. Unfortunately, there are many South Africans who are denied the opportunity to realise their potential as a result of their social and economic circumstances. While the reasons for this situation are many, most notably the devastating legacy of our apartheid past, we know that the development of our country and its people are held back by corruption, fraud and mismanagement of public resources. Which brings us to the subject of today's media dialogue. With the submission of the final report of the State Capture Commission on 22 June 2022, the African National Congress has embarked on a process to examine the commission's findings and recommendations and to develop the organisation's response. While detailing the nature, extent and scope of state capture, the report also makes critical findings about the ANC, the government it leads and individual ANC members. At its meeting of 24 July 2022, the ANC National Executive Committee noted that some of the observations and findings are unsettling for the ANC, but said that the organisation would deal honestly and openly deal with all aspects of the Commission's report. It said the ANC would use the report to identify shortcomings and take the necessary steps to address them. The ANC has consistently maintained that the Commission is a necessary part of the broader social effort to end all forms of state capture and corruption. The ANC is therefore engaging with the findings and recommendations of the Commission to determine ow these can help to enhance the process of fundamental renewal and rebuilding within our movement. The ANC has put in place mechanisms to process those parts of the Commission report that relate to the organisation, its deployees or members. The NEC has therefore adopted the following immediate action plan: Firstly, constitutional, legislative and structural changes proposed by the Commission have been referred to the relevant NEC Committees for deliberation. By way of example, the NEC Economic Transformation Committee is considering the recommendations from the commission on public procurement. As another example, the NEC Peace and Stability Committee and the NEC Constitutional and Legal Affairs Committee are together considering the recommendations around a new anti-corruption agency, the protection of whistle blowers and deferred prosecution agreements, among others. All NEC committees have started this work and some have already submitted reports to the task team. This work must be completed by the end of August 2022. Secondly, the ANC task team on state capture will make recommendations where there are findings of weaknesses or lapses by the ANC. The ANC will, among others, review its policies with respect to cadre deployment policy and practice, party funding principles, organisational discipline and accountability and Parliamentary oversight. Thirdly, individuals implicated in the commission report must immediately take the initiative and present themselves to the Integrity Commission within 2 months. This is in line with the resolution of the ANC 54th National Conference, which resolved to '...demand that every cadre accused of, or reported to be involved in, corrupt practices accounts to the Integrity Commission immediately or faces Disciplinary Committee processes. ' The Integrity Commission has been asked to complete the processing of these matters within 6 months. On recommendations by the Commission for action by specific entities, the NEC agreed that these are either part of the normal mandate of these entities which they should act on, or directed at specific industry bodies. To assist discussions within the ANC on the organisation's approach to ending corruption and state capture, the NEC has finalised a discussion document for circulation to all ANC structures and for public release. The discussion document, which we are releasing today, is meant to stimulate debate on the nature and causes of corruption and state capture, the role and response of the ANC, and the steps that must be taken to ensure state capture is never allowed to occur again. The document recognises that the fundamental renewal of the ANC as an effective agent of transformation requires that the organisation confronts corruption in all its forms — in government, society and within the movement. It outlines what the ANC understands by state capture, its causes and impact, and details how such acts of corruption stand in stark contradiction to the ANC's foundational principles and mission. The document argues that state capture serves to weaken the democratic state, cause social instability, redirect public funds for private enrichment and undermine the ability of the ANC to discharge its historic mission to build a better life for all. The document recognises — as clearly stated at the 54th National Conference — that the ANC needs to rid itself of the practices, tendencies and organisational culture that corruption has implanted, and which in turn have enabled corruption. The document refers, among other things, to the observation of the State Capture Commission that: "Understanding the role of the ANC is vital to understanding State Capture in South Africa. State Capture has happened under its watch. " It notes that this and other observations have significant implications for the ANC and its response to the commission report. They call for a seismic shift in the ANC's approach to several issues raised by the Commission. The discussion document notes that rebuilding and renewal require far-reaching changes to the way the ANC works: "It will require substantial political will and extensive political work throughout all structures of the organisation. At the centre of the renewal effort is the work underway to fight corruption and end patronage as a feature of the ANC's organisational life." The document outlines proposals on the role of members and branches in this work and suggests issues for discussion within ANC structures. The ANC firmly believes that the work and findings of the State Capture Commission provide an opportunity for South Africa to make a decisive break with the era of state capture. While there may not be consensus on all the commission's recommendations, they lay the basis for a comprehensive set of actions to prevent corruption and end state capture. As the African National Congress, we are determined to seize this opportunity for renewal, for the sake of our organisation and the sake of our country. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 27 July 2022