Two former ABB employees and their wives arrested linked to Eskom contracts awarded to Impulse International (PTY) LTD for R549.6 million 12 July 2022 The NPA’s Investigating Directorate arrested four accused persons (two former ABB employees and their wives) were arrested in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal and Middleburg, Mpumalanga and their electronic equipment was seized during a joint search and seizure operation with the Hawks and SARS today. Mohammed and Raeesa Mooidheen who were arrested in Middleburg and appeared at the Randburg Magistrates’ Court, were granted bail of R50 000 and R30 000 each. Vernon and Aradhna Pillay who were arrested in Durban and appeared at the Durban Specialised Crimes Court were granted R20 000 each. The four are linked to the defrauding of Eskom through its contractor ABB and they stand accused of cashing in on gratifications estimated at R8.6 million, including cash and luxury cars, by inflating prices for Impulse, a subcontractor to ABB. The former ABB employees, Mohammed and Vernon, stand accused for their influence in the awarding of over R549.6 million of the Eskom-ABB contract, for the benefit of Impulse between the period 2015 to 2017. This is reportedly despite the fact that it was reported that Impulse did not actually qualify to do the work required. The accused are charged for corruption, fraud and money laundering. This is deemed as one of the seminal matters that the NPA has referred to, for the reason that Eskom was really at the core of state capture and features prominently in the Zondo Commission Report, where executives at the most senior levels of the SOEs seemed to enable or facilitated for the looting of state funds. Investigating Director Adv Andrea Johnson says that that the ID is hot on the heels of those accused of State Capture. ‘’This is a clear demonstration of collaborative work between the ID, Hawks and SAPS and more seminal cases will be enrolled as we continue to reprioritise cases emanating from the Zondo Commission reports. The National Director of Public Prosecutions, Adv Shamila Batohi, National Commissioner, General Fanie Masemola and Hawks head, General Lebeya met today to reinforce a working relationship among law enforcement and NPA in a bid to ensure that those most responsible for alleged corruption and state capture are held to account and that the rule of law is upheld.” The matter returns to court on 14 October for further investigation of assets seized today. Issued by Sindisiwe Seboka, Investigating Directorate Spokesperson, 13 July 2022