MEC Lesufi dismisses claims that he attacks Afrikaans 5 July 2022 Gauteng Education MEC Mr Panyaza Lesufi wishes to clarify concerns which allege that he seeks to attack Afrikaans and mother-tongue education in schools by using the Basic Education Laws Amendment (BELA) Bill, as insinuated by the Democratic Alliance (DA) during their misleading campaign and picket outside Gauteng Education Offices today. The responsibility for determining and reviewing legislation in the basic education sector of general application at a national level lies with the Minister of Basic Education. This is done through broad consultation with various stakeholders such as Unions, SGB Associations, all HODs of Provincial Departments of Education (including the Western Cape) and the Council of Education Ministers (CEM), which includes MECs from all nine provinces and a DA minister who sits on the CEM. All nine provinces sanctioned the amendments proposed by the BELA Bill and they were tabled in Parliament. As such, we find it odd that this progressive Bill would be termed as a ‘Lesufi Bill’. The BELA Bill is a national policy, and is not exclusive to Gauteng. As such, the Minister is the one that initiates the Bill to be introduced to the National Assembly. Prior to this being done, consultation takes place with stakeholders and a socio-economic impact assessment is done to establish the social and economic impact of the proposed amendment. The Bill is subjected to checks from the State Law advisors for policy and legal compliance is then tabled for approval of the cabinet to invite public comments through a gazette. In addition, Parliament has the right to subject the Bill to further public commentary and scrutiny. Hence, Parliament, through the Portfolio Committee, has extended the deadline for stakeholders and interested individuals to submit written comments on the BELA Bill until 15 August 2022. All public comments received are analysed and considered for inclusion in the proposed amendments. Once the process is completed, the draft Bill is 2 amended, taking into account relevant comments from the public and subjected to compliance checks by the State Law Advisors. Therefore, the picketing is misdirected and misinformed. The process of passing this draft Bill is currently in Parliament, and all concerns parties who want to avoid the process of submitting written comments on the Bill, must raise their concerns directly with Parliament. Part of the amendments included in the BELA Bill is that a Head of Department (HoD) may direct a public school to adopt more than one language of instruction, where it is practicable to do so and that, if the HoD issues such a directive, he or she must take all necessary steps to ensure that the public school receives the necessary resources that enable it to provide adequate learning and education in the additional language of instruction. In addition, the Constitutional Court judgement on the Schools Admissions Policy stated that the HoD is the person who determines the policy, as such the amendments in the BELA Bill regarding language simply clarify the role. This Bill simply advocates for, among other progressive amendments, the introduction of other languages to be taught in our schools. It further promotes fair and meaningful access to schooling. The DA is trying to prevent fair and meaningful access to schooling by picketing against this Bill. “Therefore, the insinuation by DA and other organisations stating this Bill is being used to attack Afrikaans and mother-tongue education is senseless. This Bill intends to promote and defend all languages in all schools. They must not bring politics into the education space. Our children must be in the same classroom learning and playing together,” said MEC Lesufi. Issued by Steve Mabona, Spokesperson, Gauteng Department of Education, 5 July 2022