EFF STATEMENT ON THE MURDER OF 14-PEOPLE IN A TAVERN IN SOWETO AND 4-PEOPLE IN PIETERMARITZBURG Sunday, 10 July 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) is alarmed by the murder of 14-patrons, at a Tavern in the Nomzamo settlement in Soweto, Gauteng, in the early hours of Sunday morning. This shooting, can only be categorised as a terrorist attack, regardless of whatever underlying motive there may be. There is no justification or rationale for killing innocent people, no matter what ends such an attack sought to achieve. The culprits in this heinous crime must therefore be understood as terrorists who have effected a massacre in Soweto. The further reports that 4-patrons were shot dead in a tavern in Pietermaritzburg, Kwa¬Zulu Natal, give credence to the EFF's long-held view that policing in South Africa under the moronic Bheki Cele has collapsed. Criminals have confidence that the justice system has no capacity to hold them accountable, and have graduated from petty crimes to co-ordinated acts of terror. All of this, is while Bheki Cele meddles in tenders and procurement processes of the South African Police Services (SAPS), and purges those who stand in his way. Bheki Cele is preoccupied with accumulating money, politicising and factionalising the police department, while South Africans die in their numbers. His useless PR-stunts of visiting sites of crime after the fact, serve no purpose, as criminals are not discouraged by his crocodile tears after people have died. Those tasked with governing South Africa are weak and criminals are taking advantage of that. There is no sphere of South African society that is escaping the incompetence of the ANC-government and this incompetence has now become deadly. The EFF sends its deepest condolences to the families and loved ones of all those who lost people close to them in the tragedies that have befallen Soweto and Pietermaritzburg. We send comfort to the families and pray that the souls of the deceased rest in perfect and eternal peace. Statement issued by the EFF, 10 July 2022