EFF welcomes decision to honour Kaizer Motaung with an Honorary Doctorate 6 July 2022 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) welcomes the decision by the University of Cape Town (UCT), to bestow South African Football Legend Kaizer Motaung with an Honorary Doctorate. The University of Cape Town will on the 22nd of July 2022, honour Ntate Kaizer Motaung with an Honorary Doctorate in Social Sciences, for his tremendous contribution to Sports Development. The EFF recognises and salutes the Commander in Chief and President of the EFF, Julius Malema, who at the 2nd National People's Assembly (NPA) of the organisation, called for Kaizer Motaung to be honoured for his service to the footballing fraternity in Africa. The CIC made this pronouncement in his opening and closing address at the highest decision making body of the EFF, and we are glad that society has followed his wisdom and foresight. Ntate Kaizer Motaung, has been a beacon of football development in South Africa, the continent and the world, from when he was still popularly known as "Shintsha Guluva" in his illustrious time as a footballer. His football career began at the tender age of 16-years old, when he played for Orlando Pirates Football Club. Ntate Motaung would go on to break records and win accolades in North America, playing for Atlanta Chiefs, where he scored 16 goals in 15 matches in his first season. He brought back to Africa a wealth of talent not only on the field but as a football administrator. It was this acumen that led him to form one of the most successful and recognisable footballing brands in the continent, Kaizer Chiefs. Under his stewardship, the institution known as Kaizer Chiefs was built on the values of "Love and Peace" and economic security for players who were under the firm heel of the exploitative Apartheid regime. The foundation he laid has grown from strength to strength, and made him central to the formation of the Premier Soccer League (PSL in 1996), alongside Dr. Irvin Khoza and played a pivotal role in South Africa's bid to host the FIFA World Cup in 2010. Ntate Kaizer Motaung has long deserved to be honoured, and the EFF appreciates the fact that the University of Cape Town is playing a role in celebrating an African icon while he is still alive. This shows that the institution is on the correct path of centering African excellence, even in fields that may not be academic in nature. The role of Kaizer Motaung in developing young lives and sport, is admirable, particularly at a time where the youth of South Africa succumbs to alcohol abuse, drugs and unemployment. We celebrate Dr. Kaizer Motaung and may his legacy inspire others. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 6 July 2022