National Assembly Programming Committee informed of designation of Mr Xolile George as Secretary to Parliament 19 May 2022 The National Assembly’s (NA’s) Programming Committee was this morning, during its regular weekly meeting, informed of the designation of Mr Xolile George to the position of Secretary to Parliament. The NA Deputy Speaker, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, said: “We are glad to announce that the Executive Authority of Parliament is now in a position to recommend for consideration by the Houses of Parliament, the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, Mr Xolile George as Secretary of Parliament.” The Deputy Speaker’s announcement is an outcome of a recruitment process led by a multiparty panel. “We are confident that we have the right candidate for the job and, on behalf of the Executive Authority, I wish to thank the Honourable Members who served on the panel and participated in the recruitment process,” said Mr Tsenoli. A motion recommending Mr George for the position of Secretary to Parliament is scheduled for consideration by the NA during its hybrid plenary session on Wednesday, 25 May 2022. Once endorsed by both Houses he will assume his duties as Parliament’s new Accounting Officer on 1 June 2022 – on a five-year contract. Mr George is the current Chief Executive Officer of the South African Local Government Association and his experience in policy formulation, legislation, systems and programme implementation at local, provincial and national level spans 28 years. The Programming Committee was also informed that Speaker Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula has agreed to a meeting with the leaders of opposition parties. The meeting, which was requested by Mr Bantu Holomisa – leader of the United Democratic Movement, is also scheduled to take place on Wednesday, 25 May 2022. Furthermore, the NAPC was informed that the President has brought to the attention of Parliament Part IV of the Report of the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into Allegations of State Capture, Corruption and Fraud in the Public Sector including Organs of State. The letter from the President was published in the Announcements, Tablings and Committee Reports (ATC) on 17 May 2022. The administration of Parliament, including legal services, is currently going through the report in order to identify matters that may need consideration by the relevant institutional structures. The final report will be submitted to the President on 15 June 2022 and the President will have four months after receiving the report to submit it to Parliament. Issued by Moloto Mothapo on behalf of Parliament, 19 May 2022