EFF STATEMENT ON THE PASSING OF HILLARY GARDEE, DAUGHTER OF FORMER EFF SECRETARY GENERAL GODRICH GARDEE Tuesday, 03 May 2022 The EFF regrets, with deep sadness, to inform the public about the passing of the daughter of EFF Former Secretary General, Hillary Gardee. The body of Hillary Gardee was found abandoned outside Nelspruit in Mpumalanga, after she had gone missing on the 29th of April 2022. This heart-breaking news has left the Gardee family distraught, and the collective leadership of the EFF at a loss for words. Hillary Indira Gardee, aged 28, was born in Lagos Nigeria in 1994. She was the first born daughter of Commissar Godrich Gardee, and her loss has left immeasurable devastation, as he grapples with the pain of losing a child in such a callous, cruel and inhumane manner. Hillary was an enthusiastic, kind and loving individual, who had a passion for Information Technology. She was a student at the University of South Africa, studying IT part-time, while running her own IT business. Her kindness and generosity, was most evident in her commitment to adopt and care for a three-year old child, who by the grace of God was spared on the day of Hillary's abduction. She looked after the child as if she were her own, an inspiring act for a woman of such a young age. We send our deepest condolences and sympathies to Commissar Gardee, the Gardee family and those who were close to Hillary. We mourn with the Gardee family, and will provide a helping hand to ensure that her memory is preserved and she goes to her final resting place with dignity. The family at this time is still reeling from the terrible news of the loss of their child, and as such is not in a position to speak to the media or the public. We appreciate all the efforts of those in the public sphere, who formed part of the efforts to find Hillary Gardee. We thank the people of South Africa for banding together behind a self-less activist, and we thank all members of the EFF for rallying behind our Former Secretary General and Commissar, who has dedicated his life to the liberation of our people. May this chapter, which has ended in such an unfortunate manner, be instructive to all of us on the scourge of Gender-Based Violence and the need to fight against the war on the women of this country. After consultation with the family, it has been resolved that all inquiries regarding the passing of Hillary Gardee can be forward to the EFF Communications Office. We plead for patience, sincerity and compassion, in this difficult time. May the soul of Hillary Gardee rest in perfect, peaceful and eternal peace. The EFF sends its deepest condolences and sympathies to Commissar Gardee, the Gardee family on the passing of their daughter Hillary Gardee. We mourn with the Gardee family during this difficult time.May the soul of Hillary Gardee rest in perfect, peaceful and eternal peace. pic.twitter.com/r8BNI1yXS2 Statement issued by the EFF, 3 May 2022