DA calls for audit of Cuba-loan 16 May 2022 Note to Editors: Please find attached English and Afrikaans soundbites by Willem Faber MP. The DA will write to the Auditor-General of South Africa (AG), Tsakani Maluleke, to request an urgent audit of the ANC government’s loan to Cuba. In answer to a written parliamentary question from the DA, President Cyril Ramaphosa revealed that a total of R147 631 000 has been loaned to Cuba since 2018, in a deal a deal set up by former President Jacob Zuma in 2010 after his state visit to the country. Of the more than R147 million loaned to Cuba, more than R63 million has been paid back. But the DA has serious concerns regarding this loan – not least of which is the fact that it is fiscally very irresponsible for South Africa to loan money to any country. We have one of the highest unemployment rates in the world, and our economy is in tatters after the severe mismanagement of the Covid-pandemic and years of State capture, looting and corruption by the governing party and almost all connected with them. The ANC government’s justification of this loan, as well as its intention to spend a further R50 million in aid to Cuba, is reprehensible. More than a thousand children have died due to malnutrition in South Africa in 2021/22, and instead of addressing food security and poverty here, the ANC government is giving away money we don’t have. The DA will ask the AG to also investigate whether the Cuba-loan agreement and the R50 million “donation” – which the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation, Naledi Pandor, have since stated would be given as food – could possibly be a money-laundering scheme where the money lands back with the ANC. The ANC government has proven that there is no scheme to foul to feed their greed. Text of reply MINISTRY INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA NATIONAL ASSEMBLY Date of Publication 29 April 2022 QUESTION 1665. The Leader of the Opposition (DA) to ask the Minister of International Relations and Cooperation:  What are the full details of (a) all the (i) monies, (ii) loans, (iii) aid and (iv) goods and services that have been spent on Cuba since he became President on 15 February 2018 and (b) the explanation of why the Government has chosen Cuba as a beneficiary of South African aid and assistance? NW1993E  REPLY (a)    (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) A loan was made available to Cuba under an Economic Assistance Agreement for agricultural development projects as well as reconstruction of infrastructure. The loan was divided into two tranches. The first tranche of R63 million was made available in 2018. The Cuban government has fully repaid the loan. The second tranche of R84 631 000 million was made available in 2021. The Cuban government has been repaying the loan since December 2021. The total loan to Cuba since 2018 is R147 631 000. (b)    The relationship between South Africa and Cuba dates back well before the 1994 democratic elections, and the friendship and solidarity with Cuba should be viewed within the context of the significant contribution that Cuba made to the liberation of South Africa. The South African Government signed an Agreement on Economic Assistance with the Government of the Republic of Cuba on 3 February 2012, entering into force on 21 November 2012. The 2012 Agreement was one of the outcomes of the 2010 State Visit to Cuba by the then South African President. The latter announced that South Africa would offer Cuba an Economic Assistance Package to assist with agricultural development projects as well as reconstruction of infrastructure, following the damage caused by devastating hurricanes in the Caribbean in 2008. The Economic Assistance Package enhanced economic collaboration with Cuba especially through improved bilateral trade and increased goodwill from the people of Cuba. Through the package exports of South African agricultural products, plastic resins, dump trucks and tires were increased, jobs were created and retained, there was business reinvestment, consumer support to the RSA manufacturing sector, and channels for payment from Cuba were established ENDS ENDS Issued by Willem Faber, DA Member of the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation, 16 May 2022