Gardee Family Thankful For Support After The Passing Of Our Daughter, Hillary Gardee Sunday, 8 May 2022 The Gardee Family takes this opportunity to thank South Africans, the people of Africa and the world, for the tremendous support and solidarity pledged to us, after the tragic passing of our beloved daughter, Hillary. The burden and weight of our grief, was eased by the outpouring of love from our people, both prominent and ordinary, and the amount of comfort we have received from the care and compassion is immeasurable. We wish to thank the people of Mpumalanga, South Africa and the continent for participating in the search and rescue efforts both on the ground and on social media. It is our collective wish that we could respond to all the messages of support and condolences on all media platforms, however during this period of mourning, this has not been possible. We have received all of these messages, through email, our personal media accounts and cell numbers, and hope that in due course we will be able to respond and express our appreciation. We extend our gratitude to the South African Police Services (SAPS), and the entire investigative team for their patience, commitment and diligence, even when confronted by our grief, anger and frustration. Their speedy response to resolving this matter and finding the perpetrators, is one which we wish they will emulate in all other criminal matters. To civil society and the media fraternity, we thank you for your messages of support and raising of awareness of the murder of Hillary. It is indeed an unfortunate but instructive tragedy, that all of us as society must rally together to fight against Gender-Based Violence, and urge the men in this country to cease the war on women. We thank all political parties, trade union leaders and people in the business sector, for their heartfelt support, both through statements and presence in the days preceding the funeral and on the day of the burial of Hillary. Hillary's passing has proven to us that we are not enemies, but human beings who are able to band together in times of tragedy. Finally, to the mighty Economic Emancipation Movement, the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF), we thank our Commander in Chief and President Julius Malema, the Officials, members of the Central Command Team, leaders of component structures and ground- forces, for the unwavering support. We are truly blessed to be part of a movement that resembles a family. The organisation has been with us from day one, and our appreciation for the contribution our movement has made in giving our daughter dignity towards her final resting place, will never be forgotten. The family will now allow the legal system to conduct its work, as Hillary, the Gardee family and the people of South Africa will not know peace until justice is served for Hillary. We hope this matter will be resolved speedily, without unnecessary postponements and prolonged deliberations, in order to show perpetrators of Gender-Based Violence that our judicial system is harsh and firm on this type of crime. Issued by Godrich Gardee via Twitter, 8 May 2022