Stand against fuel hikes: DA urges public to co-sign objection letter 24 May 2022 Note to Editors: Please find attached English and Afrikaans soundbites by Kevin Mileham MP. The DA is working on every available avenue to stop fuel price hikes, and slash the taxes on fuel. As our latest action, the DA encourages the people of South Africa to join us in this effort, and co-sign a letter to the ANC Government, against their upcoming fuel price hikes. The letter is directed to both the Ministers of Finance and Energy. With the fuel price set to increase with between R3.50 and R4 per litre in June, the price will soar to the highest it’s ever been, breaking the backs of all South Africans. The DA implores Finance Minister Enoch Godongwana to scrap the 33% tax levy on fuel in order to keep the price within reason. The exorbitant 33% tax on fuel rests squarely in the hands of the ANC government. South Africans simply cannot afford the fuel price increase. Our economy is still in tatters and there seems little hope and indication that government is trying to right the ship. The unemployment lines keep growing, while households become poorer with each passing day. Rising fuel prices mean that all other costs of living will dramatically increase as well – food, transport and other necessities. The DA is working all out to lighten the load on consumers and ensure that South Africans can make ends meet as the petrol price hike looms: Introduce urgent legislation to immediately deregulate and reduce the fuel price, which will bring immediate relief for all commuters as retailers compete to offer lower prices. Work to reform or replace the bankrupt and mismanaged Road Accident Fund’s levy with a workable system that does not add to the fuel price. Call for an urgent debate of national importance in Parliament to end as much of the ANC government’s fuel taxes as possible, and to implement the DA’s caring proposals. Introduce a comprehensive rescue plan for South Africa to reduce the cost of living on all fronts. The DA urges every South African who has felt the pinch of recent increases and cannot afford to pay anymore to please co-sign our letter. Issued by Kevin Mileham, DA Shadow Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy, 24 May 2022