Mthethwa’s political castles in the air, pipe dreams and grasping at straws 19 May 2022 Minister of Arts, Culture and Sport Nathi Mthethwa is a highly divisive figure in the South African political landscape. If he is not busy changing the names of towns, he dreams of theme parks for apartheid and colonial statues, and 120-metre flags that should become tourist attractions at a cost of R22 million. All this in the name of social cohesion. The absence of any success in his portfolio, and questions about his achievements in recent years, especially from the ranks of financially struggling artists and sports federations that, under his political leadership and interference, stumble from one embarrassment to the next, have him grasping at straws. The most recent is the absurd instruction that the Afrikaans Language Monument must change its name. Minister Nathi Nthethwa's heavily ideological view was already evident in a conversation with journalists on Sunday 19 March 2017 during the launch of the ANC's policy documents, when he said, amongst other things: “White South Africans have not fully done their part for reconciliation in the democratic order after 1994." On 16 April 2019, he also blamed Jan Van Riebeeck for the death of struggle leaders. This is the background against which his instructions and his application of social cohesion are to be seen. Punish and accuse white people in the name of social cohesion. It is especially clear that the Minister of Arts, Culture and Sport has no understanding of art, culture or sport and is simply another cadre for whom a place had to be found on the gravy train. In particular, it is clear that the minister deals with language and cultural heritage - emotional issues that need to be handled with care - like a bull in a china shop. All in the name of social cohesion. The Afrikaans Language Monument was built during the sixties and seventies of the last century, with mainly Afrikaans capital, input, time and energy. It cost approximately R760 000, of which approximately R300 000 was contributed by the State. The balance was contributed by Afrikaans civic organisations and individuals. Today, the monument is inclusive and symbolically recognises the contribution of European, Indonesian and African languages to the development of Afrikaans. Afrikaans is seen as a bridge between the languages, which are also symbolically depicted. The "instruction” or “decree" of the Minister reaffirms that there is no understanding or respect within government ranks for the South African - and in this regard specifically for the Afrikaans - language community. In the almost frantic attempt to impose ideological social cohesion on South Africans, pragmatism and reality are lacking. It is clear that we have totally different views on social cohesion. We see it as respect for and understanding of one another, promoting the diversity of South Africa and building relationships from which a new South African ideal can develop. Minister Nthethwa's view is one of an outdated ideological compulsion to force artificial unity, regardless of the consequences. Africa Day is celebrated on 25 May 2022. It is ironic that the Council of the Afrikaans Language Museum and Monument must meet a few days later (26–27 May) in Paarl and that Afrikaans role players must fight on 28 May to preserve the name of a monument and museum for a language named after the very continent. Can one minister be so out of touch with a language community? Issued by Jan Bosman, Chief Secretary of the Afrikanerbond, 19 May 2022