ANC STATEMENT ON THE OUTCOMES OF THE 9TH EC PROVINCIAL CONFERENCE 10 May 2022 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes the outcomes of its Eastern Cape 9th Provincial Conference held from the 6th May to 9th May 2022 at East London International Convention Centre in Buffalo City Metro. We commend the over 1500 delegates for the disciplined conduct displayed at the conference. We also appreciate the role played by the Provincial Task Team (PTT) as well as the Regional leadership of the ANC representing over 8 Regions for contributing towards the success of the conference. The outcomes of the conference represent the democratic views and wishes of members of the ANC in the Eastern Cape Province. We wish the newly elected leadership the best of success and look forward to their constructive contribution towards the overall renewal of our movement. The success of the Provincial conference is yet another testimony that the basic units of the ANC are very much alive in the Eastern Cape. Our organization's ability to live and lead society is best consolidated through active branches. The elections of members of the Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) were administered by the Elexions Agency - which is an independent electoral agency, and the outcomes were verified by the Electoral Commission composed of representatives of the Regional Executive Committees and representatives of the ANCYL and ANCWL. The ANC is satisfied that the elections were free and fair and the debates were robust and frank, in the true traditions of the movement. The Conference was conducted with a high level of discipline and political maturity: electing new leadership and emerging united. We remain hopeful that the outcomes of this provincial conference will strengthen and build the organization in the Eastern Cape to become the best instrument of transformation in the hands of our people. In the build up to this conference, the PTT conducted pre-conference commission allowing branches of the ANC to express themselves on policy priority areas. The work of this all inclusive pre-conference commission is to be taken further by a Provincial General Council (PGC) which has been endorsed by conference. We are confident that the ANC in the Eastern Cape will remain stable. focused and united in serving the masses of our people The following comrades were elected as Officials of the Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) : Provincial Chairperson Lubabalo Oscar Mabuyane Deputy Chairperson Mlungisi Mvoko Provincial Secretary Lulama Ngcukayitobi Deputy Secretary Helen Sauls-August Treasurer Zolile Williams With the following comrades elected as Additional Members of the PEC: 1. Fundile Gade 2.Bukiwe Fanta 3.Nonceba Kontsiwe 4.Nqabisa Gantsho 5.Loyiso Magqashela 6.Stella Ndabeni Abrahams 7.Nomakhosazana Meth 8.Xolile Nqatha 9.Lindelwa Dunjwa 10.Lindiwe Gunuza 11.Sixolile Mehlomakhulu 12.Sisisi Tolashe 13.William Ngozi 14.Nanziwe Rulashe 15.Yanga Zicina 16.Nonkqubela Pieters 17.Virginia Camelio Benjamin 18.Clara Yekiso 19.Avela Mjajubana 20.Sindile Toni 21.Tandekile Sabisa 22.Siphokazi Mani-Lusithi 23.Nozibele Nyalambisa 24.Thokozile Sokanyile 25.Nontuthuzelo Maqubela 26.Mthetheleli Sam 27. Nomhle Sango 28.Siyabulela Zangqa 29.Mpumelelo Khuzwayo 30.Andile Lungisa In closing the 9th Provincial Conference President Cyril Ramaphosa reminded delegates that: Our leaders must be the most advanced cadres of our movement and be exemplary in their conduct, integrity and their commitment to the people's cause". The ANC once again congratulates all delegates for contributing towards the success of the 9th Eastern Cape Provincial Conference. Issued by the ANC, 10 May 2022