The NPA must be resourced so that it can prosecute 17 May 2022 Note to editor: this is the speech that was delivered by GOOD Secretary-General and Member of Parliament, Brett Herron, during today's Parliamentary Budget Vote on Justice and Correctional Services. Madam Speaker, One of the greatest challenges currently facing South Africans is the minority of South African politicians and crooks who feel nothing while they continue to exploit, cheat and deny the justice system of this country from exposing their true nature. State capture, and the cleaning of corruption off of the parliamentary shelves, is of utmost importance to the survival of this country and for our democracy to retain the faith of our people. The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) recently announced, following the damning reports of the Zondo Commission, that there will be a creation of a new task force focused on state capture. This is a step in the right direction. However this single step is at the base of the mountain of corruption that South Africans have been struggling against. If there is one takeaway from the Zondo Commission findings it is that whatever information has been revealed is but a fraction of the truth and for this country to move forward, we need to be looking not at the roots of the tree but rather those actively trying to chop it down. Advocate Shamila Batohi has admitted that this is a major challenge for the NPA and that there is a likelihood of an “economic collapse” should the latest anti-corruption methods fail once again. Have the words “economic collapse” lost all their impact? Are we so climatized to crisis and corruption in this country that despite nearly being labelled as junk status we are willing to accept these words again? We, the South African people, must hold this new NPA force to the highest standards possible and see to it that it remains impartial, unbiased and independent from outside influence from its inception. We should also heed Chief Justice Zondo’s advice and ensure an independent Public Procurement Anti-Corruption Agency (PPACA), including a council, inspectorate, litigation unit, tribunal and court, be established. Common sense must prevail and with more independent organizations created to protect South Africans it is harder for them to become infiltrated by agents of corruption. It is time for the justice system of this country to be seen to be pursuing justice and to rescue itself from our darkest hours. For this the NPA must be properly resourced. We must put our faith in South Africans and their cry for justice, and they will put their faith back in us. Issued by Brett Herron, GOOD: Secretary-General & Member of Parliament, 17 May 2022