KZN Floods: MEC reveals that there is no R1 billion in disaster funding from national government 5 May 2022 Despite an assurance from national government that it would contribute R1 billion from its contingency reserve in National Disaster Relief Funding to a flood-ravaged KwaZulu-Natal, the province will not receive any money and will instead have to reprioritise its already tight budget to cover the amount. The shock revelation was made earlier today during the KZN Treasury Budget Debate by Finance MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube. This after the DA posed a question around how national relief funds would be spent by KZN government Departments. The MEC’s response was “there is no 1 billion rand” coming from national government. The MEC further confirmed that KZN’s government will have to re-prioritise its budget to find the R1 billion over the MTEF, over the next three years, in order to deal with this. I later engaged with the MEC regarding her comment during the debate and she confirmed her statement that no money was coming from national. The DA is stunned by this revelation. It flies in the face of reports that national government, the National Minister of Finance and President Cyril Ramaphosa had promised KZN R1 billion from the Fund, which is set up precisely for such situations. If one looks at KZN’s budget and the cost of the July 2021 anarchy to our province, budgets are already stretched to the limit. For province to find R1 billion over the MTEF means that certain capital projects and other projects will have to be held over. This is going to create an enormous financial burden on the province’s fiscus. Ultimately, it is KZN’s people, who have already suffered so much, that will bear the brunt of this unforeseen expenditure. This matter demands urgent attention. Is this another unfunded mandate such as the Izinduna issue handed to our province by Jacob Zuma when he was still president? Or has the MEC misinformed the House? The DA calls on government to provide clarity as a matter of urgency. Issued by Francois Rodgers, Leader of the DA in the KZN Legislature, 5 May 2022