Home Affairs Committee concer ned by impact of budget cuts on IEC operations 4 May 2022 The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs welcomes the Electoral Commission of South Africa’s (IEC’s) clean audit for the 2021/22 financial year but is concerned by the impact of budget cuts on its operations, especially programme 3: outreach, and the implications of this for running free and fair elections. The committee yesterday received the IEC’s 2022/23 annual performance plan and, while the targets are clear and well thought out, the implications of continuous budget cuts remain a concern. While the committee is cognisant of the fiscal pressures facing South Africa, it believes that underfunding this important pillar of South Africa’s democracy should be reconsidered to ensure that democratic processes are not undercut. The committee was informed that there will be a cut of R769 749 000 over the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework. “The unintended consequence of underfunding the IEC will have a practical impact in delivering elections that are free and fair. We are concerned that, for example, for the 2024 national and provincial elections, the budget cuts have resulted in the second registration weekend not being funded,” said Mr Mosa Chabane, the Chairperson of the committee. Also, the low voter turnout during the 2021 local government elections emphasised the need for democracy education aimed at encouraging increased participation. While this need is pronounced, the committee is concerned that the budget cuts will affect the ability of the IEC to fully fund initiatives to promote and foster awareness and participation in the general electoral processes. Despite these concerns, the committee has reiterated its calls on political parties and civic organisations to assist the IEC in driving educational initiatives aimed at increasing participation. Furthermore, the committee encouraged collaboration between the departments of Basic Education and Higher Education to incorporate voter education within the curriculum, as this will alleviate the financial pressures. Meanwhile, the committee called on the IEC to work closely with the Department of Home Affairs to develop a process for dual enrolment on the population register and the voters’ roll to ensure that new voters are captured, especially the youth. Regarding the Amendment of the Electoral Act of 1998, the committee acknowledged the implication of the amendment as it relates to funding the IEC. The IEC informed the committee that the expected impact is significant, especially because there might be a need to rewrite ICT business applications and the candidate nomination, logistics information, and results systems. It might also necessitate staff retraining, re-delineation of voting districts, and the reconfiguration of IEC local offices. The committee assured the IEC that its processes are underway, expecting to conclude on 24 May 2022. Despite the financial challenges, the committee supported the 2022/23 APP and said that achieving targets will go a long way to strengthen South Africa’s democratic dispensation. Among other things, the committee emphasised the plan to continue maintaining a credible national voters’ roll, using technology to implement the IEC’s operations, and managing political party funding, as per the Act. The committee also welcomed the IEC’s planned initiatives to engage with funders to contribute to the Multi-party Democracy Fund, as this is critical to enabling political participation. The committee recommitted to its oversight mandate to ensure that the IEC delivers on its mandate and maintains its position as being a credible Chapter 9 institution in support of South Africa’s democracy. On the Government Printing Works (GPW), the committee welcomed the progress achieved since its oversight visit last year and was encouraged by the GPW’s footprint in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) region to strengthen its business portfolio, which is demonstrated by the SADC countries that have already signed MOUs to use its printing services. This will also create more job opportunities for the youth. Meanwhile, the committee will in due course receive an investigation report from the Minster, since the appointment of Ms Gumbi to investigate maladministration at the institution. The committee resolved to monitor the Auditor-General’s audit action plan. Issued by Malatswa Molepo, Media Officer, Parliamentary Communication Service, 4 May 2022