ActionSA Registers Gains in 1st Multiparty Government Budget 27 May 2022 On Wednesday the 25 May 2022, the first budget of the Multi-party Government in the City of Johannesburg was tabled before council. As second largest party in the City of Johannesburg Council, ActionSA has registered budgetary gains in line with our 2021 Local Government Election promises. In March, a draft budget was tabled in Council for public participation. Following this, ActionSA identified issues non-negotiable items to be added the draft budget, which were subsequently included and agreed to. The following are some of the highlights: The Transport Department was allocated budget for the following projects: The Public Safety Department was allocated budget for the following projects: The Economic Development Department was allocated budget for the following projects: These are some of the projects that have been allocated funds in this new budget cycle. ActionSA reaffirmed their commitment to accelerate service delivery in the new financial year. We are happy that our inputs relating to the skills audit; the commencement of institutional review as well as the office of the deputy mayor are so included into the IDP. Furthermore, ActionSA will continue to champion the prioritization of important issues that include illegal immigration control; insourcing of cleaners and security guards; and the Inner-City Rejuvenation Programme. These are not only important issues, but they are also the priorities of this multi-party government to which all partners agreed to in the coalition agreement. We are also pleased that 2 items for ward 23 are now approved on the IDP. The Glenanda Clinic and the Mulbarton Taxi Rank will be formalised. We urge residents to help the City to protect public infrastructure and to report vandalism and theft to the relevant authorities as the City strives to do as much as possible with limited resources. Statement issued by Funzi Ngobeni, ActionSA Johannesburg Caucus Leader, 27 May 2022