DA wins battle to have President Ramaphosa account to Parliament 26 May 2022 Click here for a soundbite by Siviwe Gwarube MP, Deputy Chief Whip of the DA. Last week, I wrote to the Speaker of the National Assembly, Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula to argue that the rules of the National Assembly demand that the President appears before Parliament to answer questions on burning issues facing South Africans. See the letter here. This morning, during the National Assembly Programming Committee (NAPC) - with the support of opposition parties across the board - we argued that President Cyril Ramaphosa should fulfil his obligation to Parliament and be scheduled for Questions to the President during this term of the National Assembly. This is in accordance with Rule 140 of the National Assembly rules which states that the President should appear before Parliament to answer questions at least once a quarter. This has not been scheduled in the current draft of the second term programme. Despite the fierce opposition from the Speaker and the ANC MPs in the committee, the opposition was able to argue for accountability and for Parliament to flex its muscle as it pertains to holding the executive to account. We will be unrelenting on this matter. The Zondo Commission Report details how Parliament has failed in its responsibility of demanding accountability from the executive on behalf of the people of South Africa. We will never allow the same to happen again. The continued stonewalling of the work of Parliament by the ANC will not succeed. We will be intolerant of the Zuma Presidency era tactics of keeping the President away from Parliament when there are crises like the rising cost of living facing ordinary South Africans. People have been let down by public representatives for far too long. It can no longer be allowed to continue. Text of letter: 19 May 2022 Ms N N Mapisa-Nqakula, MP Speaker of the National AssemblyParliament of the Republic of South Africa CAPE TOWN 8001 Dear Madam Speaker, SCHEDULING OF DATE FOR THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, MR M C RAMAPHOSA, TO RESPOND TO ORAL QUESTIONS IN THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY DURING THE SECOND TERM 2022 IN ACCORDANCE WITH NATIONAL ASSEMBLY RULE 140(1)(a) I am writing to you to request that you liaise with the Office of the President of the Republic, Mr M C Ramaphosa, and the Office of the Leader of Government Business, Mr D D Mabuza, MP, as appropriate, to identify a date before we enter the constituency period from 20 June 2022 on which President Ramaphosa will avail himself to respond to oral questions posed by Members of the National Assembly (NA). Although I am aware that President Ramaphosa will most likely be introducing the debate on Budget Vote 1: The Presidency scheduled for 9 June 2022, debates do not take the form of an oral question session, and as such this appearance before the Assembly cannot be regarded as the fulfilment of his obligation to appear before the Assembly at least once per Quarter to respond to oral questions in line with NA Rule 140(1)(a). I firmly believe that it is of the utmost importance that Members of the NA are afforded regular opportunities to engage with President Ramaphosa on a range of urgent matters of national and international importance. Moreover, it is imperative that President Ramaphosa should set the example as the Head of the Executive that the Government is indeed serious about fulfilling their obligations of being held accountable to the Assembly by ensuring that he attends to his parliamentary duties. I look forward to your favourable response and the proposal of a suitable date to the NA Programme Committee in the near future. Yours faithfully, S Gwarube MP Democratic Alliance ENDS Issued by Siviwe Gwarube, DA Deputy Chief Whip, 26 May 2022