ActionSA’s Senate Makes Two Key Leadership Appointments 08 May 2022 Following ActionSA’s performance in the recent Local Government Elections, bolstered by Wednesday’s by-elections in Ward 96, ActionSA’s Senate has made two key leadership appointments deemed essential to the 2024 campaign. We are pleased to announce that John Moodey, who has served as ActionSA Gauteng Provincial Chairperson since October 2020 after the Party’s official launch in August of the same year, will now take up the role of National Director of Operations. Moodey is essential to the work of supporting our provincial structures in achieving ActionSA’s national objective of wall-to-wall branches across South Africa be the end of 2022. Moodey takes over the role from Funzi Ngobeni who now serves as MMC for Transport in the City of Johannesburg and ActionSA’s Caucus Leader in the municipality. Former Mayor of Midvaal and ActionSA Senator, Bongani Baloyi, has been appointed as the Gauteng Provincial Chairperson to replace John Moodey. It is no secret that Baloyi is the likely ActionSA Gauteng Premier Candidate and the Senate has seen the strategic importance of his leadership over the Province ahead of this all important provincial election in 2024. These appointments form part of ActionSA’s key structural alignment to deliver on the strategy for the 2024 national and provincial elections. Arising from our results achieved in 2021, ActionSA’s Senate has focussed on the imperative of capacitating the organisation for the massive expansion planned. This announcement would be incomplete without acknowledging the vital role played by Funzi Ngobeni as the previous Director of Operations. At a time when ActionSA was merely a dream, Ngobeni built structures across the 9 provinces that continue to bear the mark of his dedication and leadership. Ngobeni remains a vital figure in the leadership of ActionSA and member of our Senate. We have no doubt that both Moodey and Baloyi will deliver on their mandates in the same manner that they have to date. Statement issued by Herman Mashaba, ActionSA President, 8 May 2022