ANC statement on Africa Day 25 May 2022 As we celebrate the 2022 Africa Day on, we reflect on 20 years of the founding of the African Union (AU) when it succeeded its predecessor, the Organisation for African Unity. The AU has declared Africa Day 2022 - The Year of Nutrition: "Strengthening Resilience in Nutrition and Food Security on the African Continent" The ANC wishes every patriotic African a jubilant day of remembrance and motivation towards building the Africa we want -which is a better Africa for all. The ANC would like to remind every African that Africa shall be genuinely free when its problems are solved through African solutions. We need to reflect on how we are advancing Agenda 2063, and our much-needed continental free trade initiative, AfCFTA. The AU has chosen Nutrition as its 2022 focus, and therefore we should ask ourselves as to when Africa can confidently assert that Africa is able to feed herself. The ANC appeals for a deeper probe into the underlying causes of the prevalent coup d'etats, especially in West Africa. An effective way of reversing persistent and threatening conflicts in Mozambique, the DRC, Somalia, Ethiopia, Libya,the CAR, West Africa, Western Sahara, Cameroon, Tunisia(again), Chad, Zimbabwe and others, must be a target that haunts us on a daily basis. However, we as the ANC lament the resurgence of militarisation efforts by the United State of America (USA) as evidenced by the recent establishment of a military office in Zambia. This is a horrifying omen for our continent which is striving for a prosperous and peaceful Africa. Furthermore, another challenge is the growth of fundamentalism on religious, cultural, and political grounds- a scourge that always leaves devastation in its wake. It is important to raise concem about the growing stagnation of the Pan African Parliament, an institution with enormous potential which is supposed to play an important role in the realisation of the Agenda 2063 goals. Another important attribute is the strengthening of Party to Party relations, such successes will hamess the intensification of solidarity campaigns within the African continent and globally. We cannot neglect to continue to call for intensified solidarity and support for the people of Westem Sahara and their struggle against colonial Morocco, a call for the release of political prisoners in eSwatini and the need for opening up for an all inclusive dialogue there to craft lasting solutions. We also hope for a SADC, especially Lesotho, Zimbabwe, DRC and Mozambique that is successful in their joumey to stability, revitalisation and growth. The ANC further contends that Africa needs to reflect on its practices in global relations particularly in the face of the deterioration of even the modicum of peace and stability that has been experienced, and preparing Africa for engagement in BRICS especially in the light of an expected response to the intensive attacks on Russia and China, promoting multilateralism which is currently being undermined and even sabotaged. The spirit of Pan Africanism must be the guiding light in planning the journey henceforth. The ANC further calls for youth of Africa to take charge and play a greater leadership role in advancing their communities and countries, consciously responding to societal challenges and tackling these head-on. Notwithstanding all the trepidations and challenges, The ANC wishes all keen, committed and concerned African mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers and youth a worthy Africa Day that should be celebrated in high spirits. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 26 May 2022