Provincial commissioner announces the arrest of a suspect in connection with Hillary’s murder 2022/05/07 The Provincial Commissioner of the SAPS in Mpumalanga, Lieutenant General Semakaleng Daphney Manamela has announced a breakthrough made by the police in connection with Ms Hillary Gardee’s murder on Friday, 06 May 2022. “Up to so far, we managed to arrest one male suspect at Schoemansdal in Nkomazi within the 72-hours that we were given. We believe that we have the right suspect and we are looking forward to make more arrests as the investigation continues”. The team was given a moral support by both the Divisional Commissioner: Detectives, Lieutenant General Senthumule and Lieutenant General Manamela. The team showed dedication and worked relentlessly where they spent sleepless nights for days without being distracted from their goal which was to crack the murder case. On Friday, 06 May 2022 they sniffed out a 39-year-old man from his hiding place in Schoemansdal. Amidst the hurdles and pressure that the team went through as the nation and the world watched them with anticipation, the men and women in blue proved that they were equal to the task. They skilfully and professionally carried out their duties from the onset when the body was discovered outside Nelspruit, following all the trail of evidence up to a point where the investigation led them to the arrest of the suspect. The male suspect is facing a murder charge and more charges could be added against him as the investigation proceeds. He is expected to appear before the Nelspruit Magistrate's Court on Monday, 09 May 2022. Police are adamant that more arrests could be made in connection with the case. The Provincial Commissioner of the SAPS in Mpumalanga of the SAPS in Mpumalanga, Lieutenant General Semakaleng Daphney Manamela has further expressed her appreciation to the Police Minister, General Bheki Cele and the National Commissioner of the SAPS, General Fanie Masemola for the unwavering support that they gave to the province with regard to this case and for having shown trust as well as confidence on the team that was assembled by the Mpumalanga Provincial Commissioner. “We also want to thank the public for their overwhelming support and encouragement as we toiled since we began working on this case. We were never derailed but our joy will be fulfilled when justice is served and every person that had a hand on the murder of Hillary Gardee is brought to book" said the General. Statement issued by Colonel Donald Mdhluli South African Police Service, Office of the Provincial Commissioner Mpumalanga, 7 May 2022 Update: Two more suspects arrested in connection with Hillary’s murder 2022/05/08 The Provincial Commissioner of the SAPS in Mpumalanga, Lieutenant General Semakaleng Daphney Manamela has appreciated the energy and commitment put by the established team that is probing Ms Hillary Gadee’s murder case. So far three suspects have been arrested. This comes after the arrest of two men in Nelspruit between yesterday late night and early hours of the morning. “This is encouraging and as we indicated that there were other people of interest that we were following and interviewing. Through our investigation, which is still proceeding, we were able to come out with information that we fully believe the two are the right suspects” said the General. The two are to join the 39-year-old suspect that was arrested on Friday, 06 May 2022 in Schoemansdal (Nkomazi). As earlier indicated, more suspects may be arrested as the intensive investigation proceeds into the murder of the 28-year-old Hillary Gardee who was laid to rest on Saturday, 07 May 2022 in Nelspruit. The Provincial Commissioner of the SAPS in Mpumalanga of the SAPS in Mpumalanga, Lieutenant General Semakaleng Daphney Manamela has indicated that for the sake of succeeding in this case the public, including media is urged to support the team of investigators as they follow some leads so that everyone that has a hand on the murder of Hillary Gardee is brought to book." Statement issued by Colonel Donald Mdhluli South African Police Service, Office of the Provincial Commissioner Mpumalanga, 8 May 2022