DA welcomes Parliament’s about-turn on Zondo Commission report following pressure 17 May 2022 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite by Siviwe Gwarube MP The DA has noted the Speaker of the National Assembly, Nosiviwe Mapisa- Nqakula’s about- turn on the process which should be followed in dealing with the findings of the Zondo Commission Report in Parliament. This u-turn is the result of unrelenting pressure from the Democratic Alliance (DA) for Parliament to begin its work of processing the various volumes of the Zondo Commission report, especially the aspects which deal with sitting members of Parliament and the institution’s failure to exercise oversight over the Executive during State Capture. The DA managed to obtain a legal opinion which was sent to the Speaker almost two months ago confirming that Parliament is empowered to and should begin the work of processing the Zondo Commission report. This is a massive departure from the Speaker’s argument that Parliament should wait until the President tables his Implementation Plan. Her and the ANC’s vehement objection to Parliament getting to work is well documented. The reality is that Mapisa-Nqakula has been stalling this process in the National Assembly Programming Committee (NAPC) while sitting on a legal opinion drafted by Parliament’s own Legal Services for several weeks. Nonetheless, we welcome the confirmation that the Joint Committee on Ethics and Members’ Interests has been requested to investigate possible contraventions of the Code of Ethical Conduct. The members which are clearly named in the legal opinion include current Chair of Chairs, Cedrick Frolick for his alleged involvement in the Bosasa matter and Ms Winnie Ngwenya. This is an important step for transparency and accountability. The Ethics Committee should move swiftly. Much of the information and documentation they would need is publically available. We must not relent until those who have looted our country for years are brought to book. Parliament can no longer afford to simply be a by-stander in issues affecting South Africans. Corruption is not a victimless crime, it robs the people of this country. We will continue to make sure that the parliamentary process continues in earnest. Issued by Siviwe Gwarube, DA Deputy Chief Whip, 17 May 2022