EFF statement on the support of Ria Ledwaba for SAFA president 17 May 2022 The EFF states its unequivocal support for Ria Ledwaba, who has despite bullying and intimidation, availed herself for the position of the South African Football Association (SAFA) President. Born in Medingen, just outside Modjadjiskloof in Limpopo, Ledwaba has a rich history in football, having been the first woman to own a football club popularly known as Ria Stars. Ledwaba has exhibited a passion for the development of youth and women's football, and her tenacity for unearthing youth, produced football legends such as Teko Modise, Lucky Lekgwathi, and has seen her pioneer initiatives to promote women's football. SAFA is an institution that has been characterised by mediocrity, failure, and directionless for more than a decade. There is no progress in grass-roots development of football, women remain underpaid as compared to their male counterparts and the men's national team in particular, does not inspire confidence. The election of Ria Ledwaba will be a breath of fresh of air in the footballing fraternity, as she will have a meaningful appreciation of the disparity between the development and treatment of female football stars and those who are male. The attempt at stifling her from engaging the public on the merits of her candidacy is nothing but a patriarchal, politically motivated and shallow campaign by old men, who have no meaningful contribution in football administration. SAFA has an opportunity to transform itself for the better, by placing Ledwaba as its President, and allowing her to flood the ranks of the institution with footballing legends who have an experience of football practically. The era of using SAFA as means to deploy politicians and maintain patronage must come to an end if South Africa is to genuinely be considered a footballing country. In Ledwaba, we are once again presented with an opportunity to promote women leadership. Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 18 May 2022