Stellenbosch University reacts to allegations of institutional racism 17 May 2022 Stellenbosch University (SU) strongly condemns any form of racism or intolerant behaviour based on racial or any other prejudice. Human dignity is non-negotiable at Stellenbosch University and must be respected, upheld and restored when affected. The University deeply values respect, compassion, equity, accountability and excellence in all its interactions and conduct. The institution has an ongoing programme of promoting inclusivity and transformation in all aspects of the university. Discriminatory acts undermine this approach as supported by the university and the overall majority of the staff and students. Sadly, individuals acting on their own individual and personal prejudice undermines the university’s overall efforts towards creating a welcoming atmosphere for all at this excellent institution of higher learning.  University authorities are currently investigating a widely publicised very serious incident that occurred in the early hours of Sunday. In dealing with the incident that occurred in Huis Marais on early Sunday morning, decisive disciplinary action has already been taken on Monday including the suspension of the alleged perpetrator. In line with the law and governance of the university further investigation is currently underway towards a swift and final outcome in the matter. Permanent expulsion and/or criminal charges are definitely not excluded from the possible available outcomes based on the investigation’s findings. SU is committed to supporting the victim of the incident with equipment and counselling to ensure his academic progress is not affected by the incident. An investigation is also underway into an alleged incident that occurred at the Law Dance on Thursday 12 May when racist remarks were allegedly made towards a female student. University authorities are in discussion with individuals, attendees of the dance, faculty leadership and student representatives to ascertain the facts at hand as well as more information about the formal complaint by the affected student. Authorities have also met with the affected student, while she has also been assisted in the process of reporting the matter to the University’s Equality Unit. The Law Faculty will also ensure that she has access to the necessary counselling services. The University took note of the public statement issued today by the SU Juridical Society and will engage directly with them as a key stakeholder in this matter. The SU community will unswervingly continue in its endeavours to find a workable and sustainable way forward to ensure that the rights of everyone on campus are safeguarded and promoted in the interest of the development and academic achievement of our youth as our nation’s future leaders. SU again reiterates that its unwavering priority is to provide a safe and inclusive environment for all its students and to maintain a welcoming and safe student community where social cohesion is promoted to provide quality tertiary education for all. SU strongly condemns any destructive or discriminatory behaviour that infringes the rights of any student or member of the community of the University. Racism or prejudice of any form has no place at SU and if it occurs, it will be dealt with to the full extent of the applicable laws and regulations as a matter of principle. Please note that further communication will follow separately as appropriately on these matters as soon as new facts on the investigations emerge and can be shared. Message from Professor Wim de Villiers, Rector and Vice Chancellor of Stellenbosch University: Dear students and colleagues By now you are well aware of the incident that was captured on a cell phone video in the Huis Marais residence in the early hours of Sunday morning. Understandably, the situation has gained significant media attention. The shocking and appalling incident at Huis Marais is totally unacceptable by any standard and I condemn what happened in the strongest way. This type of behaviour cannot and will not be tolerated. I am truly sorry about the pain that was caused by this incident. Stellenbosch University’s (SU) main priority is to provide an inclusive environment for all its students and staff and to maintain a safe community where social cohesion is promoted to provide quality tertiary education for all. The University deeply values respect, compassion, equity, accountability and excellence in all its interactions and conduct. SU strongly condemns any destructive or discriminatory behaviour that infringes the rights of any student or member of the community of the University. Human dignity is non-negotiable and must be respected, upheld and restored when affected. I would like to update you with where we stand in terms of this matter: The student captured on the video was suspended from the University on Monday. The student is no longer residing in the residence. A further swift but detailed investigation is currently being managed by the Equality Unit and will determine the final outcome. Stellenbosch University is committed to support the victim of the incident with equipment, material and counselling to ensure his academic progress is not impacted by the incident. While the investigation is receiving priority attention, it is critical that thorough governance and procedures are followed for a decisive outcome that will allow the full extent of the law as well as compliance with the University’s governance regulations. Permanent expulsion and/or criminal charges are possible outcomes based on the investigation’s findings. Despite the University’s strongest condemnation of the incident coupled with the significant and understandable public outcry, as required by law, proper procedures must be followed to secure a solidly defensible outcome to the situation at hand. The final outcome must pave the way to avoid any repeat of similar breaches of the right to personal human dignity on our campuses. Students and staff are encouraged to inform us of any incidences where their dignity and human rights are affected by reporting incidences to the Equality Unit so that we deal with it adequately. Click here for more information on the available structures. The Huis Marais matter is a top priority for SU management. We value the well-being of all our students and staff. Further engagement will take place once a final outcome is reached. Forward together, Prof Wim de Villiers Rector and Vice-Chancellor ENDS Statement issued by Stellenbosch University, 17 May 2022